--------------- Chapter 1 -----------------
My name is plain Sara.  Invariably those elder than me rolled it out as Sarakutty while the youngsters related to me in some way or the other used Sarachamma or Saraunty. My husband, Avarachan, in his tenderest mood which is infrequent, calls me ‘Thara’. Now don’t jump to wrong conclusions when I used the term infrequent with reference to Avarachan because ours is in fact a very peaceful and pleasant married life. The peace and harmony may be because we didn’t marry in ‘the first flush of youth’ as the saying goes but at the mature age of forty-three and thirty-eight respectively. That is remarkable in itself as in the case of either of us, there was no particular reason why we maintained the single status that far. I feel some sort of an elaboration is needed here.
In Avarachan’s case, when he was around twenty three, his job took him over to the North-Eastern part of India, the state of Mizoram to be exact, where he happily spent almost two decades until he came over to get married and settle down in his native place. Not being much of a home-travel person, his home visits were infrequent and almost stopped after both his parents passed away within a span of five years, several years ago. Although he was unmarried, the old rambling ancestral home was his inheritance. Avarachan’s elder brother and family of wife and two children had long ago constructed a modern house in the adjoining share of the family property. His elder sister and her family lived a few comfortable kilometers away. The three siblings were cordial enough towards each other and when they met occasionally on some family gatherings the subject of Avarachan’s marriage prospects were mentioned in passing though nothing fruitful could be materialized mainly because the bridegroom-to-be was seldom available in their vicinity.
And so the years drifted. Imagine the surprise and curiosity of not only his siblings but also other close family members when one fine morning he resigned his job came home and announced his intention of getting married right away. Nevertheless all joined hands to make the happy occasion possible. When enquired about his expectations of the prospective bride, being a man of few words and an apparent lack of sensitivity, Avarachan’s answer was (so they told me later) “an affectionate and caring person”. At the time I was a math teacher in our village high school, where my sister-in-law’s, sister-in-law Annie was also teaching.
Now on to my story. I was the youngest of three girls. By the time I was born the eldest was already fourteen and the middle one twelve, our mother and father were forty and fifty years old respectively. My father was a post-master who cherished the idea of voluntary retirement on the grounds of ill-health throughout his working years. My strong-willed mother quashed his notions by saying that a father of three daughters could not afford to indulge in such fancies. Though I was too young to comprehend the intricacies of getting daughters decently married, my parents were able to manage just that as I later learnt from their occasional comments and from the appreciative remarks of relatives. The eldest and family later settled in USA and the second sister and family who were initially working in South Africa finally chose Australia as the country to settle in and to raise their children. As a result, their homeward trips were few and far between and family ties weakened as the years passed by except for the dutiful exchange of Christmas Cards, etc.
By the time I finished high school, my father retired and promptly declared himself as ailing and was expected to be treated as an invalid. To his dying day which occurred just a week past his 80th birthday, I couldn’t help but wonder whether his incapacitated feeling was genuine or imaginary. Amma was coping with Appa’s whims and fancies rather well which left me more or less free to pursue my post-graduate studies and later join the teaching staff of our village high school. Both my sisters had come for Appa’s funeral and during their short stay there were vague discussions about my marriage which of course took flight into oblivion once they left the scene. 
I was getting on to thirty and occasionally felt somewhat irritated at my family’s disinterest in my affairs especially when I saw how concerned my colleagues were over their children. But such fleeting moments of uneasiness did not drag me under the weather for long because by nature I was gregarious and the activities at school kept me extremely busy and contented. Moreover, soon after Appa’s death, Amma’s health declined almost overnight leaving me no time for brooding even if I wanted to. A host of ailments tormented her and even though we had a day-time help tending to Amma’s needs and all, I had to take up the reins of domestic management as soon as I came back from school. This state of affairs continued for the next ten years. 
Although my sisters had visited Amma two or three times during this period my marriage prospects were never mentioned. To be honest, that did not worry or embitter me unduly. Maybe it was partly because of my close friendship with our old parish priest who was my Appa’s friend. It was dear Achen who helped me to see the ‘glass half-full’ on most occasions. Towards the end of December that year Amma’s condition deteriorated to such an extent that both my sisters and their families were also there when she breathed her last. 
Even though their families left soon after the funeral, my sisters stayed back, this time clearly perplexed about my future. As for me, I wouldn’t have minded to go on living in our old house and continue teaching in the same school. It was as though, once our parents passed away, my two sisters saw me as their responsibility and our relatives also seemed to share the same view. So it was with much alacrity that my sisters grabbed the proposal tentatively put forward by my colleague Annie in favor of Avarachan. Although they were understandably a little apprehensive about the lack of information regarding Avarachan’s ‘twenty and some’ years of odd life in Mizoram, his good family connections and stable financial status qualified him as an eligible candidate in their eyes. Not to lose time it was arranged he could come and meet me within two days. 
For the first time in my life I felt anxious about the prospect. When I confided my fears to dear Achen he comforted me by saying Avarachan would be even more anxious. My sisters in their anxiety were making subtle suggestions to me for arranging my hair and wearing the most suitable sari etc. Their jittery behavior kept me rather amused with the result that when the great day and hour came I was my usual composed self. Everyone had expected Avarachan to be accompanied by his sister and brother. But instead, he came with a distant cousin older than him who happened to be a cousin of my eldest brother-in-law. Thus an air of informality prevailed. 
As soon as I was introduced to Avarachan, he stood up and solemnly said that he wished to talk with me privately. We stepped to the side room which used to be my study. Now it was mainly used as the ironing room. Though the room was well-kept I still remember absently thinking then that the linen on the table was wearing thin. We sat opposite each other across the table. He was a stocky fellow and with an unsmiling expression he began “I don’t know how to tell this to you” and unsure as to how to continue unknowingly flashed a smile instead. The smile had so transformed his expression that I exclaimed thoughtlessly that he had a boyish grin. I would have given anything to take back my impulsive comment but his response was a much relieved “Oh! Now I think it will be alright with you, please do look at this” and saying thus took a photograph from his purse and held it out to me. As I had no option but to view the photo as suggested, I took it in my hands and examined it dutifully. It was a family photo of a couple with their two or three year old son sitting in his mother’s lap smiling. The wife looked North Eastern and the husband had all the makings of a South Indian though I couldn’t say for sure whether he was a Keralite or a Tamilian. 
When I looked up I saw Avarachan watching me with a mixed expression of hope and fear. He took the photo and replaced it in his purse and said in a rather dispassionate tone that the man in the picture was the son of his good old friend Pappychettan who had worked in his company in a subordinate position. As Keralites were few in that part of the Mizoram Pappychettan and Avarachan became closely associated and as time went on they served the role of a second family for him. Pappychettan had only two sons - the elder one having married a Malayali girl and settled in another district with his wife and three children. When Pappychettan became disabled a few years later, his second son was allowed to work in his place in the company. When this second son expressed his wish to marry a local girl from their church choir, Pappychettan and his wife made no objections and after their marriage, the couple started living with them. Little Johnny was born the next year and on his third birthday his parents took him out on their bike to buy him his favorite ice-cream. On their way back, they met with a terrible accident which left the wife dead on the spot and the husband following her after a few hours in the hospital. When Avarachan rushed in to see him he was barely conscious and on meeting Avarachan’s eyes tried to move his lips to form the word Johnny. As usually happens in road accidents, Johnny had miraculously escaped with minor injuries, though a graze on the left side of his cheek had caused a longish scar downwards near the eye. 
And now, continued Avarachan, it was six months since the accident. Pappychettan and his wife moved in with their elder son’s family. Johnny’s maternal grandmother had been taking care of Johnny ever since, but there were a few problems. For one thing they were a poor joint family and the additional liability was too much for them. This much Avarachan had gleaned from his weekly visit to Johnny. The poor mite was so happy to see him and expected his usual ride on his bike up to town and back every time. He paused for a few moments, his words sounded as unemotional as ever, but his eyes had softened a little as if he was seeing the little Johnny before his eyes.
The moment passed and when he resumed talking the words came out softly as though he were thinking aloud. “You see I am not much of a talker and come to think of it not much of a thinker either. But last Sunday by the time I had come back to my flat and taken a shower, a decision had already been implanted in my brain and all I had to do was to act on it. When I discussed the idea of adopting Johnny with a close local friend he said I would have to acquire a wife first. He also warned me that if I told the whole story and the reason for wanting to marry there would be few takers. But … please you will agree won’t you? Because… because you have kind eyes”, the words tumbled out of him in a rush. I have gone over this scene mentally several times during the past years searching for the reason why I nodded my head in agreement with the unusual business-like proposal and every time I ended up with the conviction that the ‘decision was implanted in my brain’ too just as he said. 
Immediately he stood up smiling. I had risen too.  He extended his hand as if to clinch our business deal which I ignored completely simply because I was not used to shake hands with men. He said “Shall we go and tell the others, but please don’t tell anyone about Johnny yet - we can deal with it after we marry.” To this I said “I wish to tell our dear old Achen about it. I am sure he will want to see you.”
Avarachan had come to see me on a Saturday evening and on the very next Saturday, we were married in Avarachan’s parish church in the presence of mostly close relatives and friends. I had met dear old Achen on Sunday and told him the whole story. He didn’t say anything for a few moments and then put his hands over my head and prayed ‘Oh! Lord, bless my dear child, her husband and her son.” Trying hard to choke back the sob that had arisen to my throat, I impulsively kissed Achen’s hands, who then surprised me by putting his frail hands around me and patting my back. 


On the very next day after our marriage, we started on our journey to Mizoram. To everyone else, it might have looked like a honeymoon trip. To me, the whole episode beginning with Avarachan’s first visit to see me to our return with little Johnny in tow is a haze except for a few pleasant and poignant memories standing out. As for sights and scenery from the trip I do not remember much which is unusual for me.
The lush greenery of Kerala whispered sweet nothings as they drifted by with the result that once the train crossed Kerala borders some sort of an easy companionship had blossomed between us. When we started out, we were almost perfect strangers not even knowing each other’s full names let alone other relevant personal and family details. It also helped that we were in the company of complete strangers - there was not a single other Malayali in our compartment. I soon discovered that Avarachan had a wry sense of humor making me laugh out at times, which in turn kept him in good spirits. And to my secret delight I also noticed that he had a protective streak in him of which he was completely unaware. In the time it took to reach our destination, I was in possession of the essential details about his immediate family. 
My late father-in-law (Appachan) was a high school teacher in the capital city with great aspirations for his children’s education. The eldest son ‘Achayan’ became an eminent surgeon and retired as Professor of Surgery from the Medical College a year back. Now he was consulting in one or two prominent private hospitals. His wife Alice Kochamma hailed from a so-called aristocratic business family and that alone ought to excuse her slightly condescending manner Avarachan informed me. It was evident that he felt no rancor over this only he couldn’t help being amused some times. They have a daughter and a son. Their daughter Bindu, was married to Alex, who was a brilliant engineer working for a renowned construction company headquartered at Chennai. They with their daughter Pinky aged five years were living in Poona at the time of our marriage. Achayan’s son, Regi, married a doctor like himself. Regi and Betty were both pursuing higher studies and working in England. 
Avarachan’s elder sister Susy Ammamma and her husband Thampychayan retired as college professors. Their only daughter was married to a UN official. They had a four year old boy, Sunil. 
According to Avarachan, he was the least studious of the siblings and it was solely due to his father’s persistence that he got admission in a Tamil Nadu Engineering College and passed out as a Civil Engineer. He was actually besotted to sports of almost all forms in his school and college years and it needed the iron will of Appachan to keep him on track. In those days civil engineers found it difficult to get government jobs in Kerala and so when one of his classmates helped him to get a job in God-forsaken Mizoram everybody urged him to take it up till a better one nearer home presented itself. 
Now, with a twinkle in his eyes, Avarachan informed me that it was quite a tearful farewell at the railway station and his mother while kissing him goodbye had mournfully asked “When will I see you again, Mone?” He promptly replied that he would come home for the next Christmas. He did keep his word but when he went back his family knew that he had no intention of giving up his job in Mizoram. To him the job meant a life not only unfettered by restrictions but also full of opportunities for pursuing all the outdoor activities to his heart’s content. Then he paused for a moment, looked at me straight in the eyes and with a serious expression said “Mind you, I never got into any shameful misconduct solely because it was against my nature”. And I found myself simply believing him. 
It was late evening when we reached our destination. Avarachan’s local friend met us at the station and took us to his home for dinner and afterwards drove us to Avarachan’s flat. Soon after breakfast we headed out to meet Pappychettan and family. En route, I expressed my apprehensions about little Johnny’s family’s reaction to Avarachan’s intention of adopting him to which he replied with a laugh “Oh! You just wait and see”. As soon as we entered the house I understood what had made him so cock-sure - Avarachan was virtually their eldest son who was expected to make decisions at crucial occasions. Pappychettan and his wife welcomed him with such warmth that I felt at ease immediately. That warmth in its entirety enveloped me too. Pappychettan’s older son, Thomaskutty, accompanied us to Johnny’s grandmother’s house. 
During that short journey which hardly took half an hour, I felt suddenly anxious and nervous about meeting the little boy. Butterflies played havoc in my stomach. My heartbeat was loud enough to drown the conversation Avarachan was carrying on with Thomaskutty. As the minutes ticked by, I worried Johnny might take an instant dislike of me thus jeopardizing Avarachan’s idea of adoption. But what actually transpired was quite to the contrary. 
When the taxi stopped in front of their house, Johnny who was playing with a cousin immediately looked up and with lightning speed rushed towards Avarachan who took him up in his arms and smacked a noisy kiss on his cheek. “Unki, where have you been all these days?” Johnny cried out in Mizo. Hearing this Avarachan unceremoniously dumped the child onto my arms. I was so taken aback by his action that all I did was to stare at the little one, who was also staring back at me. Then slowly a smile crept up his face and he put a small finger to touch the tip of my nose. And I instinctively held him closer and kissed him softly on his forehead. Then there were smiles all around and much babbling in Mizo which Avarachan translated as “Johnnny likes her and she seems to be loving and caring too”. That put me at my ease and when I bent down and kissed Johnny’s grandmother it was with genuine affection. Our final goodbye to the family is virtually etched in my memory. The grandmother went on kissing the little boy while tears silently ran down her wrinkled face. Then she took hold of both my hands and kissed them and said something which Avarachan told me later was “God bless you my daughter.”
As for Pappychettan’s family they made it no secret that they found their Avarankutty’s choice of a wife most appropriate and Chedathy especially avowed that the Lord had answered their prayers. And it was Chedathy who asked Johnny to call me ‘Amma’ instead of the expected ‘Aunty’. His own mother was called ‘Mummy’. Most of Johnny’s features resembled that of his uncle Thomaskutty, though there were hints of his mother’s North Eastern descent around his forehead and eyes.
Our return journey with Jo was uneventful. The forced proximity within the train was conducive to us jelling as a family. But as we were approaching home I could distinctly sense a feeling of uneasiness creeping over Avarachan. I was sitting by the window and Jo was asleep over our laps. “Hey Sara, how much should we tell everyone? I mean about the adoption part,” asked Avarachan. Our journey was winding down and there was hardly an hour more left before we reached our destination. His question took me by surprise. Somehow I was under the impression that as he did during the onward journey, Avarachan would be in charge of everything regarding little Johnny. It took a few seconds for me to register his perplexion was genuine. 
I considered the situation from different angles. As a matter of fact we didn’t owe an explanation to anyone. Still keeping our near and dear ones in the dark about the true state of affairs was not a fair thing either. So after a few good minutes contemplation I suggested that we could tell that Jo was the grandson of Avarachan’s close friend Pappychettan, whose parents had died in a road accident and that we took him along with us for a change of scene etc. The rest of the facts we would disclose as the occasion demanded. Avarachan was visibly relieved to hear the solution that he spontaneously put his arms around me in a tight embrace and exclaimed “Thara, you are a genius! Thank God, you were not snatched up by somebody else.” Little did I know then that it was not only the beginning of his term of endearment but also the beginning of my role as the planner and decision maker in all domestic matters.
While we were away Avarachan had with foresight, arranged through a friend to thoroughly clean the house and install a modern kitchen etc., so that when we arrived around noon the house and the surroundings had taken on a pleasant younger look. We started working immediately and before nightfall had all the basic essential arrangements completed. The master bedroom had an adjoining smaller room which we thought would be ideal for putting up Johnny till he was big enough to sleep in his own separate room.
We were unsure whether Achayan and Alice Kochamma knew about our arrival. We thought it prudent to call on them with Jo, rather than waiting for their duty visit. Avarachan had asked me to handle the issue of Jo’s presence with us on the ground that I was good at explaining things in a casual, but rather pleasing manner. Even though he was pandering to my vanity simply for getting out of tricky situation, I complied. Thus the three of us after an early supper went through the opening in the hedge that separated the compounds to pay our respects. Upon meeting Alice Kochamma, I could understand how apt Avarachan’s description was of the ‘condescending manner’, though she seemed quite pleasant and all. To our great relief she did not attach much significance to Jo and so I had to impart only the bare minimum details. She was much more interested to hear about my siblings.
That night before going to bed, Avarachan telephoned his elder sister Susy Ammama to inform about our arrival. He also casually mentioned about Jo. The next day, before noon, Susy Ammama arrived alone ostensibly for inviting the newly-weds for dinner the next Saturday. But I was pretty sure that the real reason for her hasty visit was her curiosity about Jo. As I sensed that hers was no idle curiosity but a genuine concern, I told her the whole truth and showed her the photographs we had of Jo’s parents, grandparents etc. She stayed for lunch too. Avarachan had only heard snatches of our long conversation but while saying good-bye, she kissed me and said “God bless you both, my dear”, and then took Jo up in her arms and told him “I am your Susy Amachy, young man”. I took a quick glance at Avarachan.  His face registered pleasant surprise mixed with a tinge of pride.
Thus the introduction of Jo to our immediate family went smoothly. Avarachan was least bothered about our neighborhood, even though occasionally I felt uneasy at the covert glances some people cast in Avarachan’s direction when Jo was in our company. By the time the schools reopened after vacation, Jo was quite familiar with the surroundings and the slight accent he had while speaking Malayalam was completely gone. On the first day of school we accompanied our little Jo aka John Philip Abraham to his Kindergarten and like the other parents around us we nervously watched our son mingle with the other kids. Avarachan had managed to secure a job as site engineer with a city firm and Jo went with him to school and I picked him up after dismissal.
Changes for the better had also happened in our immediate families. The year after we got married Bindu and Alex had another daughter, Sally, who called herself ‘Thali’ in her infantile years, a name that stuck. Susy Ammama and Tampichayan became grandparents again, this time to little Jimmy. As the nature of their son-in-law’s work was such that they were never at the same place for long, the schooling of their two boys was undertaken by Ammama and Thampychayan.
That school year I enjoyed being idle even though I utilized my spare time to attend Jo’s studies and tried my hand at making a garden in the front yard. With the help of Anna Chedathy who came to do the yards, I pulled up the existing straggly plants and replaced them with evergreen sturdy flowering shrubs. The fruit trees were trimmed and the whole front yard was suddenly awash with light. But my real efforts went into converting the hedge between the compounds into a real treat to the eyes. There at the ends and on either side of the opening at the middle hibiscus of different variety and colors were planted. The remaining area consisted of a refreshing mix of small seasonal flowers, lantana, and dwarf plants with variegated leaves. Flowerpots with bougainvillea in various colors were hung from the low wall. The wall was topped with flats holding day blooms and punctuated with pots containing small varieties of red chili peppers. Within a year my efforts were rewarded and sitting comfortably on a cane chair in the side verandah with a book or the newspaper in my lap and leisurely watching the butterflies and the humming birds hovering over the flowers came to be my favorite pastime. The birds that dropped by at regular intervals regarded me as their ally. In time, I knew their favorites too - butterflies were partial to lavender hues and the humming birds couldn’t get enough of the reds! In fact, the glam quotient which this three-layered approach added to the place still manages to surprise me at times. 
The side-verandah was not part of the house originally. Avarachan’s father in his old age had experienced difficulty in moving around and had this one added on next to their bedroom so that he could relax in his favorite easy chair enjoying the fresh air. Now we occupied that bedroom and the side veranda became my most cherished part of the house. Avarachan came across some beautiful flagstone while scouting for work related material. These we laid down from the side veranda to the garden corner. Instead of cementing the joints we filled them with soft moss. The eco-friendly appeal of the place was such that we started having our tea on the weekends in the side veranda. Soon it became our venue to converse before nightfall. The background music was always boisterous and free courtesy of the bulbuls and the robins and the white-headed babblers.



During the next year’s Onam Holidays and Jo was in his first grade, Avarachan’s sister Susy Ammamma and family came and stayed with us for a couple of days. While we were taking our tea in the side-verandah the first evening, she mentioned that her sister-in-law Annie had enquired about me and upon learning that I was not working any more had mourned that it was indeed a pity because I was such a good mathematics teacher. 
And then she asked me “Sarakutty, why don’t you give private tuition for a few students here. This side-veranda is ideal for the purpose. You can call this ‘Saranikethan’. Don’t waste a God-given talent. If you are willing there will be no dearth of students, I am sure.” Avarachan who was listening to this agreed whole-heartedly. 
First there was the job of getting the side verandah student friendly on a slim budget. Being a minimalist I wanted to furnish the verandah in a non-intrusive fashion. In my mind the arrangement would also handle the storage needs that came with classes.  Being allergic to most things, I preferred durable surfaces which could handle a mop without buckling down. Now Avarachan was a staunch believer in recycling. Under his guidance, the local carpenter and the mason worked to give a new life to the leftover granite tiles and wooden pieces from our kitchen remodeling. They added legless seats to part of the walls and built a neat expandable table with a sunken cabinet. An old sturdy door that previously served as a single bed base now reigned as the table top. Saying I was impressed was putting it mildly.
Thus within a month after Onam, I started a class with four students - two of them were children of Avarachan’s friends and the other two from the neighborhood. Before the month was over, eight more students joined and I began teaching them two days per week from 5:00 PM to 6:30 PM when Avarachan usually went to his club for playing cards. Next year, the same students wanted me to teach them so perforce I ended up taking classes for a batch of twelve students each of standards eight and nine which left me only three evenings free per week. Though the class sizes and batch numbers increased as the years went on, after giving a prior notice to all concerned I called it a day when I turned fifty-seven, a little past the normal age of retirement for government employees. 
My teaching of course kept me abreast of what was going on at the various schools which I loved to know. But the actual silver lining in my taking tuition classes was the social exposure it gave me. Since ours was a late entry into the neighborhood it would otherwise have taken quite some time for getting accepted. 
As Alice Kochamma moved in a higher social circle I had already learnt to keep my distance in an unobtrusive manner. Though her actual visits were rare, she used to call me up now and then and our relations were kept on a cordial footing. On occasions such as prayer meetings I always went out to help out with the preparation and distribution of refreshments. And when the children and their families came on vacation, there were dutiful visits to and fro across the hedge. Regi and family came home every other year. When Thali was three years old, Bindu’s husband Alex had been transferred back to Chennai and after that they came every year during the children’s school vacation. We could see that the girls’ visit gave our Jo such happiness that we have also been subconsciously awaiting their arrival with happy anticipation. Maybe it was because they were the nearest equivalent to cousins. Though he liked the company of both the girls Thali was undoubtedly his favorite. However after high school we saw less and less of Pinky and once she became a medical student her visits became fewer still. Then while she was doing her house-surgency she was married to a post-graduate doctor hailing from a family of high social status. The alliance was a matter of great pride to both parents and grandparents. 
In the meantime our Jo had passed out meritoriously and immediately secured a coveted job in a premier central government organization. We were very glad that he could go on living with us. So was Jo. To Avarachan’s delight, Jo like him was also very environment conscious and extremely keen on recycling. 
It was also quite refreshing to note that our Susy Ammama’s elder grandson, who was a year and some older than our Jo, was now working as an engineer in a reputed firm in Bangalore. The younger one, Jimmy, was an engineering student. He was two years younger to Thali and like her, looked up to Jo.
In his primary school days, Jo was no different from the other boys of his age. But as time went on, he became quiet although always pleasant and courteous in company. In fact, he had only one close friend and that was Hari who used to be his classmate not only in school but also in the Engineering College. Through Hari, I got friendly with his mother Geetha, though she was much younger than I. Hari too was also an only child. Now that Hari has joined a company in Bangalore, the friends could meet only occasionally. But while we three were alone in the house, there was no such reserve in his behavior. He was our true son and we were his true parents. As Avarachan was a poor listener, from the early days onwards, Jo was my confidant in almost all my cares and worries. He also used to regale me with the daily happenings at school, college and now office. 
Through this all, our most cherished ray of sunshine was the occasional bombardment of Thali. She was now in the second year of Engineering in Chennai and had never made an effort to conceal her hero worship of Jocha, who in her eyes was the most brilliant chap in the world (and like all mothers this made me proud). It was from Thali we came to know that her father, Alex, had quit his job with the construction company and now had started his own company in partnership with Koshy, a friend of his college days. Both Alex and Koshy hailed from the same native place. During that year’s vacation we heard a lot about a boy called Anil who was Thali’s two years senior in college and the son of one of the directors of Alex’s former company. And the social background being compatible, the families also kept up friendly ties.
During her third year’s annual vacation, Thali came all starry-eyed and we could evince from the way she laughed while talking about Anil, which she did almost all the time, that the girl was having a crush on him. When she left the scene, I laughingly said that I was reminded of a time when I was fourteen or so, I had a liking to the handsome postman who used to come to meet Appa. But I was surprised, nay, a little bit startled to spy a faraway look in Johnny’s eyes. Evidently he had not heard a word of what I said. But the next instant he was his usual self remarking playfully how exhausting it was to listen to the monologue of Thali.
‘Amme,’ said Jo suddenly, ‘I forgot to tell you. This Saturday I am going for a picnic with the boys to the Dam.’
‘That is good, Mone’ I said. ‘How many inmates are there now?’
‘I think the head count is now at thirty two’ he answered.
By ‘boys’ Jo was referring to the boys at the orphanage run under the auspices of our church. A senior priest and his wife living in the compound were in charge of the center. A middle-aged couple were the resident helpers. Boys from age five were admitted and were sent to the local school for studying. Achen’s Kochamma was a kindly lady who took special interest in the upbringing of the kids and also lent a helping hand in their studies because she was a retired teacher as well. Jo’s involvement with the orphanage came to my notice rather late. Though he had mentioned occasionally about meeting Achen and the boys at the orphanage, the keen interest he had in their welfare was something that had escaped my attention. After he got his job he started providing not only financial help but also tried to develop awareness in the boys of how important it was for them to make the best use of their education. It was at Jo’s insistence that a bookshelf was installed at the orphanage, which over the years had been filled to capacity again thanks to Jo’s efforts mainly. For the last years New Year Celebrations, I also went along with him and joined in the festivities. The way in which the kids and Jo interacted with each other was an eye-opener to me. It was as if Jo was the eldest brother of their family who could relate to every one of them from the youngest to the oldest.



Through the past twenty odd years, I have had the opportunity to gain the friendship of many women, their ages ranging from late twenties to early seventies. Generally the younger ones were mothers or relatives of the children I taught while the elders comprised of church acquaintances. Barring a few, the majority of them and I had very little in common taste-wise or in the matter of lifestyles. Hence it has always been a wonder to me why these women sought me out for companionship, sitting leisurely on the not-so-comfortable cane chair on our side veranda while I sat on the comfortable chair correcting the work of my students. As the years passed I too fell into the habit of expecting their periodical visits when Avarachan would not be at home.
Looking back, I think that within the first few years, a pattern had evolved which my visitors found satisfactory or as some put it, ‘highly soothing to their frayed nerves.’ The younger ones who held this view seldom realized that all I did was to listen patiently to their emotional outbursts without making any comments either for or against their stand. So all the ‘soothing effect’ they derived had more to do with their own effort in the sense that talking about their grievances and confusions helped them to view the situation in the right perspective. Often I wondered whether the calm and serene view the garden offered from the verandah had a therapeutic role too. In time, I too came to appreciate the company of some older ones, especially that of EliaKochamma a few years my senior. Actually with her happy disposition and calm acceptance of life she was well liked by all who knew her.
Sally went back to Chennai after spending about one month of her vacation with her grandparents. Within this period she was in and out of our house several times. I was amused to listen to her extolling the virtues of Anil and I couldn’t help noticing that our little Thali was certainly growing to be though not exactly a beauty, but a very pretty girl. Her best asset seemed to be her expressive eyes which could perfectly mirror her mood. As she was gregarious by nature her eyes sparkled merrily most of the time to the delight of her audience. 
However this time those eyes of hers were a little cloudy as she recounted to me the lack of interest her sounding board Jocha displayed whenever she mentioned the incomparable Anil. Her greatest hurt was that Johnny had called her Sally instead of Thali when he told her to grow up in an irritated way. I consoled her by saying that the shift in her hero worship must have been a great blow to his ego. It was from her ramblings that I came to know about the thriving construction business her father was running with his friend. The high society life her people led did not surprise me. Her family and that of Anil’s met frequently at parties and his parents were also fond of her, she felt. Thus, on the whole she was definitely on cloud nine when she returned to Chennai to begin her third year of study. 
After Jo took up his job we had a set pattern in our life. Before Avarachan returned from his club Jo and I used to have a daily tête-à-tête in our drawing room. Jo would regale me with some piece of news in the office and I in turn would tell him who had visited me in my side veranda and also other news concerning our neighborhood. And when Avarachan joined us the conversation would invariably take on a political flavor and that was my cue to slip away to tend to dinner. 
There were times when I wished our Jo could have his own uncles, aunts and cousins like everybody else to talk about. But I also knew better than to dwell unnecessarily on things beyond my control. That was why Thali’s name used to crop up in our daily chats as she was the closest he had as a relative. But today I was determined not to mention her name when he came back from office. 
However as things turned out there was no occasion for our usual chat. As soon as he came home he told me he was selected with another fellow for a year’s training in France. They were to leave within a period of two weeks. I remember standing there dumbfounded. Theoretically I ought to have felt proud and happy but I felt numb all over. It must have shown in my face because Jo immediately put his arms around my cheeks and asked, “What is it Amma, aren’t you well?”I recovered in time and said with a laugh, “Of course I am alright. Oh! Johnny I am happy that you got this chance but it is rather sudden isn’t it?’ When Avarachan learnt of this news he was as proud as a peacock and didn’t care to whom he imparted it.
After Jo left for France I had a feeling of loneliness in the evenings. Then it was the visit of my friends that came as a relief. As his old computer refused to cooperate with me, Jo telephoned every Saturday night and also sent picture postcards of the places they visited during weekends. We as parents were most happy that our son was coming up splendidly. But I missed him terribly and was already counting days and months for that one year to end. 
Jo’s absence made me realize the lack of close relatives I too had. Of course there was the annual family gathering at Christmas time at Achayan’s house where we met Susymama and her family. I never doubted her sincere affection for me and Johnny. But somehow I always felt that my late entry into the family circle precluded any closer ties. Also to my mind my never having known Avarachan’s parents personally and my own childless state were other contributing factors. Whenever I try to air some of my feelings to Avarachan he simply pooh-poohed it away, asking me how I could ever feel lonely when I was the most popular and sought after woman in the neighborhood. Had my dear old Achen been alive, I would have felt much better, I was sure. As it was Elia Kochamma was the nearest equivalent to Achan.
However looking back I could say that it was during that one year that I was slowly becoming transformed from an easy going ‘no worries’ person into someone with an uneasy alertness about her surroundings. Somehow I suddenly found myself resenting the preconceived notions of my visitors about us. For example formerly when Geetha began her usual voluble complaints against her in-laws, it never used to bother me hear her saying time and again “But you wouldn’t understand my plight, having had no in-laws to contend with.” But the other day when Anu said how worried she was about her son finding a good job, I tried to console her by saying that I too had needlessly worried over Jo getting a job. Her immediate response “But Saraunty, your case is different” found me flinching inwardly.
Perhaps the seeds of uneasiness were sown by Daisy who had a married son and a married daughter. Last month after a few days’ stay with her son, she paid me a visit, mostly to relate her general dissatisfaction with her son and daughter-in-law. Recalling the many sacrifices she had to make for rearing him from his infancy she said his behavior towards her was most ungrateful to say the least. When I nodded my head sympathetically her comment was “But you can’t feel it the way I do” After she left I sat in the side veranda till at last Avarachan came back from his club. I must have been unusually quiet for Avarachan asked me twice if I was not feeling well.
Then there were some others whose comments brought about apprehension of another sort. Elsie was in search of a suitable alliance for her elder daughter employed in a bank. The girl was two years older than Jo. One day while she was confiding in me the difficulties in pursuing proposals for her daughter she suddenly burst out “Sarakutty, if only my Beena was younger, I for one wouldn’t have minded your Jo’s Assamese connection or looks.’ I was too miffed to point out her geographic error.
That night while I was washing up the plates after dinner I casually asked Avarachan his opinion on our Jo’s looks. He immediately countered with “What is wrong with his looks? Sara, tell me which one of your dear friends visited you today?’ As he was too close to the truth for comfort I sought escape in evasion by telling about Jo’s picture postcard received that day. 
That night sleep eluded me for a long time. Though through my maternal eyes Jo was perfect, to my innermost mind there crept a ‘what-if’ scenario triggered by Elsie’s words. By the time he returned from France Jo would be twenty-six and in our parts twenty-seven to twenty-eight would be considered as the ideal age for boys to get married. I knew anxiety was creeping into my mind and I did not know whom to confide in. I tried to find solace in the thought that anyway we had two long years before us in finding a solution to the problem and fell asleep.


Now Christmas was drawing near and I intended to visit Alice Kochamma two days before for discussing about the help she needed for the annual family gathering. I did go and she did tell me her plans for the dinner and all, but all through our conversation I had an uneasy impression that her mind was elsewhere. As there was little point in putting across my notion to Avarachan I kept quiet and concentrated on my duties. To learn that Thali was not coming with her parents made me very disappointed. I was so looking forward to hearing her incessant chatter to enliven my forlorn spirits. 
On Christmas day Avarachan and I attended the early morning service at our church. After the traditional breakfast of Appam and chicken curry I went over to Achayan’s to help out Alice Kochamma with the lunch. Avarachan followed me within an hour. As we had made some preliminary preparations the day before we got the lunch ready without undue haste. Susy Ammama and Thampichayan came around eleven with their younger grandson Jimmy who was also disappointed over Thali’s absence. Bindu and Alex had arrived two days ago which was rather unusual in the sense that Alex used to be so busy with his work so as to be able to spend two leisurely days with his in-laws.
Both Susy Ammama and Bindu enquired about Jo. Susy Ammama was thrilled about his training in France and declared fervently that she had always known he was a very brilliant boy. To this Bindu mildly put in that she had not seen him recently and politely asked when he will be returning. Alice Kochamma did not join in the exchange of pleasantries but was presumably engrossed in putting the final touches to the delectable pudding which was her masterpiece. But I couldn’t help notice that she was somewhat distracted and kept on casting furtive glances towards the menfolk sitting in the veranda. They appeared to be engrossed in some solemn discussion which to me seemed rather odd. What surprised me most was that even Avarachan had managed to bring down the volume of his booming voice. I was setting the table and while I walked to and fro the spacious dining room I heard snatches of what Susy Ammama and Bindu chatted. It was mainly about their many relatives, the majority of whom I did not know personally. It was while I was filling the glasses with water that I heard Susymama addressing me “Sarakutty, do you know any girl hereabouts for my Sunil? He is turning twenty-seven this March you know”. As no one crossed my mind then I told her I would definitely be on the lookout and keep her posted. 
Lunch was announced and while we ate, a lively and pleasant atmosphere with occasional bouts of hilarity set in mainly due to the efforts of Susy Ammama, Sunil and Bindu. Good old oft-repeated childhood anecdotes were unearthed making everyone laugh out. Even Alice Kochamma recalled some funny events adding to the air of joviality. I for once thoroughly enjoyed a celebration at Achayans. 
Soon after lunch we went home taking Susy Ammama and family with us. Jimmy was interested in seeing the picture post cards and some photos Jo had sent. Afterwards he happily messed with Jo’s old computer hoping to revive it. While we ladies settled comfortably in the side verandah, Thampychayan and Avarachan had drawn out two cane chairs under the sprawling mango tree that was a little away from where we sat and appeared to be chatting about some serious matter. Susy Ammama was in the mood of talking about the marriage prospect for boys in general. “You see, Sarakutty, it is very difficult to find a good match for our sons nowadays. In our days the parents selected the groom or the girl and the children were quite amenable to go by their decisions. Now the scenario is completely changed with most of them finding partners by themselves. I think we should call ourselves lucky if our boys agree to the alliance we put forth.’
As I was unsure of what she was driving at I responded merely with a half-smile. As I expected she continued to voice her thoughts, this time picking her words carefully “Sarakutty, I think you would do well to be on the lookout for your Jo also. I know he is not yet twenty-six but sometimes it may take longer than we expect.’
This time around I was completely at a loss for words. In my heart I knew she meant well but within me my anxieties about Jo snowballed. Then and there I made a mental note to go and visit Elia Kochamma. I hoped her serene presence might soothe my frayed nerves. Little did I know then what mental disturbances further awaited me round the corner! 
For the 4’o clock tea, I had made an ‘Ada Payasam ‘ the day before and served it cold. It turned out to be a huge hit with everyone after the usual cakes and cookies. Soon it was time for them to leave and as he was about to start the car, Thampychayan turned towards Avarachan and told him gravely “You better consider all the pros and cons before taking a decision” 
“Yes, yes, of course”, replied Avarachan. Then we waved them good bye and went in.
I did not feel like asking him outright what Thampichayan meant by his words. Although I was most curious I wanted him to open up the subject. As I was clearing the dining table I heard the front door being closed and could feel the presence of Avarachan behind me. “Leave the things there Sara, I want to discuss something with you”. 
I turned and seeing his grave and rather worried expression, sat down opposite him across the table with the cups and saucers scattered between us. He didn’t say anything immediately but just sat there twirling a cup absentmindedly. Then he looked up and said “Well, Achayan was telling me that Alex wants to sell Bindu’s share of the 30 cents immediately.
“You mean the portion next to ours” I asked. He nodded “Yes, that is it”. 
Honestly I couldn’t see how it affected us one way or the other, what Alex wanted to do with his property. I voiced my thought out to Avarachan. My only point of wonder was what made him want to sell it now.
Avarachan seemed a little reluctant to explain the situation. “You see Sara, I don’t know the complete details but it appears that at present Alex is in a financial fix. He and his partner had a difference of opinion about the purchase of a proposed plot for their next construction project. Alex felt it was foolish not to buy such an attractive plot for their next venture. The price demanded was also reasonable. But to buy it single handedly meant taking a huge amount as loan from the Bank. That he managed and bought it.
“I guess he wants to sell Bindu’s share of property for starting the construction. Isn’t it?” I asked brightly.
“I wish it was that simple” Avarachan replied. ‘Unfortunately it is a complicated matter there being some legal dispute about the purchase. It seems the consent of one heir was not obtained for the purchase to be valid. Now the issue is pending in a civil court and God alone knows what the judgment will be. In the meantime the interest on the bank loan is piling up to unmanageable proportions. That is why he is planning to sell the plot. 
“I see! It is a tricky situation indeed”, I sympathized sincerely. 
There still remained one piece which I could not wrap my arms around “But Aacha, (Avarachan had long since got shortened to Aacha) what did Thampychayan mean by asking you to consider the pros and cons?
“I was coming to that” said Avarachan wearily. ‘The usual method for selling a plot of land would be to advertise in the newspapers or entrust it to a real-estate agent. But Achayan is averse to that course and asked me if we could buy it from Bindu.”
To me, it was a bolt from the blue and all I did was to stare at Avarachan open-mouthed. 
‘Come on, Thara, blink your eyes and shut your mouth” teased Avarachan with a strained laugh. ‘We can of course say that we don’t have the money”. 
I recovered immediately and said ‘Don’t think I am against the idea, only it was so unexpected. But can we raise the money? I have no objection in withdrawing cash from my bank account if it would help.”
“Thank you Sara for your offer but I think yours, mine and Jo’s savings together would meet only about half of what is required. One thing I am particular about is that if we are buying, it will be at the current market price. There shouldn't be any talk of our having taken advantage of the situation.”
“What are we going to do Aacha? I can’t think of any solution.”
The time was getting on to 6’oclock and suddenly Avarachan got up and said. “Oh Lord! I forgot about the X’mas celebration at our club and I am the one to say the Vote of Thanks. Bye Sara (I am leaving the matter with you). If we can find out some way to raise the money, well and good and if not, don’t worry, we will tell Achayan the fact.”
Avarachan’s parting words were meant to put me at ease, but it didn’t. I knew that Avarachan would dearly love to fulfill his brother’s wish by buying the plot of land. I too got up and took the tea things to the kitchen for washing.
While I was washing up my mind was irrelevantly roaming over what Avarachan had told me during the early years of our marriage. His father, Appachan, had not found it easy to meet the expenses involved in the education of his children. School teachers were not a well-paid category in those days and Appachan had to send both his sons to professional colleges away from home. The income from the inherited 90 cents of land did not amount to much either. By the time Achayan completed his MBBS Susy Ammama had secured admission for MSc in the local college and Avarachan was in the first year of Engineering. Avarachan had told me that it was a trying period for Appachan and when Alice Kochamma’s proposal came up he welcomed it even though Achayan preferred to take up PG studies right away. But aware of the financial straits Achayan agreed. As his father-in-law was filthy rich, they were only too glad and proud to send their son-in-law for PG course. Achayan and Susy Ammama completed their PG courses around the same time. There was the possibility that Susy Ammama might get a Lecturer post in a private college by paying a good lump sum to the management. As raising money was a difficult proposition, Appachan urged her to take up teaching in his old High School for the time being. That she did albeit with reluctance. So it was a godsend when Thampychayan’s  proposal came up (his eldest brother was a former student of Appachan)and Susy Ammama secured job as a Lecturer in the same college where her husband taught. But as Appachan did not have enough ready cash for dowry and expenses, he had to take a portion of Alice Kochamma’s dowry - a practice quite common in those days. Even though neither Achayan nor Alice Kochamma had any objection in the matter, after the marriage, Appachan gave Achayan the 30 cents of property registering the deed in Alice Kochamma’s name. The remaining 60 cents he divided between Achayan and Avarachan - Achayan’s share was 35 cents of land and Avarachan 25 cents with the old ancestral house.
As for us the good old rambling house served its purpose well. It was a four bedroom house with numerous extras. On either side of the drawing room there are two bedrooms each. The master bedroom had a private study and the side veranda being an extension added later. On the other side are Jos’ bedroom and the guest room. As in all houses built those days all the rooms had a door opening to the outside which I personally liked.
I had finished washing and was about to take up my Bible for reading the daily portion when the telephone rang. I wondered if it would be Jo. To my extreme relief and joy it was. I myself did not know how tensed I was over the business of buying Bindu’s plot. After exchanging the usual Christmas greetings, I straightaway got to the point by saying “Jo dear, I have to tell you something” and promptly told him all the relevant details. I added that I wished we could raise the money somehow so that Avarachan would have the satisfaction of helping out his brother in his hour of need. As I did not expect Jo to be of any help in the matter, I didn’t mind telling him that Unki had said that even the savings of all three of us combined wouldn’t be enough. Jo listened to my lengthy chat mostly without comment. However when I finally finished he asked just one question “Amma do you think Alex Uncle would be able to pull through with the sale of this plot?” My answer was “I don’t know Mone.”
Avarachan had told me not to wait up for him for supper as he would be having dinner at the club. So I went about eating my solitary supper in a pensive mood. Avarachan came back just as the clock struck nine in unison with the shrill ringing of the telephone. His happy and rather excited tones indicated that it was Jo at the other end. I wondered what made Jo call again. But I had to contain my curiosity till the conversation ended because, this time it was Avarachan who was answering in monosyllables. However after putting the receiver back in the cradle Avarachan did not turn immediately but stood there as if in deep thought.
Then he turned and said “I see he had called earlier and you had told him about the 30 cents.”
“Like I had the time to fill you in” I countered. 
“Why did he call up again?” I asked.
“Well, he has thought about some way to raise the money. He says that if we could somehow get a loan from a Bank, he would easily pay it back in monthly instalments.”
“But Aacha, how can can we get a loan from the Bank? They would demand some sort of security won’t they?”
“Yes that is it Sara. As far as I know in order for us to get a loan, we will have to mortgage this house and property. What do you say? Shall we go ahead with it?” 
When Avarachan thus put the onus on me, I could answer in only one way which I did without hesitation. As soon as he received Jo’s Power of Attorney, Avarachan got together the necessary documents. From the very beginning, I had asked Avarachan to make the purchase in Jo’s name. But to my consternation, when I read the documents, I found that Avarachan had made the deed in the combined names of Jo and me. 
When Avarachan came back after paying the amount to Achayan, I asked him whether Achayan had asked him how we could raise so much money. “Of course, he asked. I just said that our Jo had made the arrangements. I did not want him to know that we had mortgaged the house. So you don’t mention it either, Sara” was his answer.
Now it was my turn to ask him what Jo had asked me “Aacha, do you think, this money would get Alex out of the woods”?
“As you know Sara, I have never had any experience with huge investments like these - so I don’t know the answer. But it is my fervent hope that with this amount he would at least gain some time for tackling the issue”
I had to be content with that reply.
As I seldom had any intimate talks with Alice Kochamma, there was little chance of my getting any further information from her on the state of affairs. As a matter of fact, I had seen her only the previous Sunday at church. She was her usual dignified self and after the service I saw her talking with Mrs. Marykutty Koshy whose husband, Mr. Koshy, was a retired Chief Engineer (Irrigation Dept). When I passed their way, both ladies turned and smiled at me benignly. Later in the evening Alice Kochamma called and asked me when Jo would be returning. Even though it made me wonder, I couldn’t very well ask her why she enquired. Anyway she gave me the reason too - Mrs. Koshy had asked her. Alice Kochamma was somehow in an expansive mood for she went on to say that Mrs Koshy was worried about getting her brother’s daughter married since her father was almost broke due to heavy drinking and all. Moreover the girl failed to complete her graduation, which was an added disadvantage. I told her rather shortly that Jo was expected to be back in May and our conversation ended there.
However hard I tried I couldn’t shake off the slighted feeling and as soon as dinner was over I told Avarachan about Alice Kochamma’s enquiry. Even though I didn’t expect a high society alliance for our Jo, I hadn’t thought anyone would belittle him so. Avarachan could see that I was deeply hurt, so he put his arms around me and said “Hey look here, Thara we will get a real princess for our little boy, don’t worry.” His expression was downright serious which contrarily made me throw back my head and laugh out till tears came to my eyes. 
‘Ah! That is better’ said Avarachan obviously relaxed.



The next day Avarachan had to attend the marriage of his friend’s son which meant he would be able to return only around 8’o clock in the evening. So I thought I would pay a visit to Elia Kochamma. Even though she had come to our place a number of times I had never got the opportunity to reciprocate. In fact I did not really know the exact location of her place. I had only a general idea that she lived near the local CSI Church. But I didn’t feel like calling her up for directions. So in a spirit of adventure I took the bus and alighted at her junction. The journey took barely half an hour. During the bus ride, my mind dwelled on how I had met Elia Kochamma. She had contacted me through a friend for clearing some doubts he son Aby had while studying in the 10th Std. Although he had taken only a few classes, the short acquaintance has resulted in a lasting friendship with Elia Kochamma. The church was at walkable distance and finding her house was quite easy as I had expected. To my pleasant surprise, the neat little house situated within the compound walls seemed to reflect the serene personality of its occupant. I knew that Elia Kochamma lived with her son’s family and her daughter who was of infirm health. The daughter was the elder one but because of her condition she was unmarried.
When I reached there I could see Elia Kochamma dozing in an easy chair with the newspaper in her lap. I didn’t want to wake her up. I just sat on the low wall beside her and took out the Reader’s Digest I had with me. But some scraping sound near the gate woke her and for a few seconds her eyes blinked at me without recognition. As recognition set in she said with an excited “Goodness me! It is you, Sarakutty” and tried to get up. I helped her and she embraced me warmly. 
‘Let us go in. How did you come? By bus? Was it difficult to find our house?’ She asked in one breath.
I answered her questions and then asked “Where are your daughter and daughter-in-law Elia Kochamme?”
“They are in that room, I’ll call them”.
I also went with her. One of them was sleeping on one cot. The other one was sitting at the edge of the cot with her back towards us, mending a blouse. Elia Kochamma told me that the sleeping one was her daughter Betty and she then went over and touched the daughter-in-law on her shoulder. She turned and to my utter amazement, Elia Kochamma pointed at me and mouthed my name. The girl couldn’t be more than thirty years old. She at once got up and came towards me with a lovely smile extending her hand in warm welcome. I clasped her hand and asked her name. She said her name, but I couldn’t make it out. Elia Kochamma intervened and told her name was Sicily. Then Sicily turned towards Elia Kochamma and said something which I couldn’t understand, but Elia Kochamma readily nodded her head. She explained that Sicily was going to make tea for us. 
Elia Kochamma took me back to the veranda. We sat on adjacent chairs. She looked me straight in the eye and said “I know you are wondering why I never told you about Sicily being deaf and dumb.” 
Without waiting for my response she went on “You see, Sarakutty, to me she has no physical defect at all. As you saw, she is able to understand what we speak and can make intelligible sounds. And to us her unbelievable good nature more than compensates for any physical difficulty.’
“Yes, I do see your point Elia Kochamma. Yet I feel it was extremely generous of Aby to marry her.”
“It was not at all generosity as you say. Most people might say that it was a calculated move on our part for ensuring Betty’s future.” But Sicily’s parents and we decided not to split hairs on the issue and thank God we went ahead with our decision.”
On hearing footsteps behind I turned. Sicily was coming towards us carrying a tray with tea and sandwiches. She put the tray on the low wall and handed me the plate of sandwiches. I took one and it was excellent. I pointed to the sandwich and gestured excellent. I was rewarded with a smile of pure happiness. When I turned to take my cup of tea I saw Betty standing at the door clutching a sandwich in her hands. She was staring at me with an expression of mixed shyness and anxiety much like a five or six year old. Then Elia Kochamma called out “Come on Betty, say hello to Sara Aunty” But Betty simply turned and went in. “You see she has stranger anxiety. But if she could see you for two to three consecutive days, the anxiety and shyness would wear off. Her problem is that for some reason, her brain couldn’t develop beyond that of a 6 year old. Aby is one year younger but from a very tender age he took care of her as if he was in fact 10 years her senior. Now that we have Sicily she takes such loving care of Betty that we don’t know how to thank our good Lord for his kindness. I am so glad you came Sarakutty”
I didn’t know how to bring up the subject of Jo and my anxieties about what others thought about him. I needn’t have worried. Elia Kochamma herself gave the needed opening. In her unobstructive way she gently asked “I think you are worried over something dear. Tell me if it would help you.”
Actually the very thought of discussing the matter with anyone at all put such a strain on my nerves. Yet I knew it had to be done.
“Elia Kochamma, I am worried about our Jo”
“Eh! What happened to the dear child?” Elia Kochamma was all concern. Seeing this my tension suddenly eased and I said with a laugh “Oh! It is nothing of that sort Elia Kochamme. My worry has to do with how other people see our Jo and us.” For the next fifteen minutes or so, I poured out my anxieties and worries to a very attentive ear.
When I finished my lamentations, Elia Kochamma didn’t say anything immediately. I felt she was searching for words for putting her thoughts aloud. Then she said in a serious tone “My dear. I can’t understand how people can be so without sense that they distinguish children as one’s own or as adopted. Why don’t they realize that all children are God’s gifts? As a wise old friend of mine once said that all the children upon the face of the earth are adopted in the sense that the only privilege He has bestowed on the so called natural or adopted parents is to bring them up. So I think you are sadly mistaken in your notions, Sarakutty. My Aby is no more mine than your Jo is yours. And Jo’s love for you two is in no way less than that of Aby’s for me. So now you take your handkerchief out and wipe your tears dear. Or Sicily may think that I have been scolding you or something”. 
Sicily had come to take the tray. She has been glancing at the gate and I saw why. Her twin sons came bombarding in, followed by their father. They were in the second standard and Aby taught in the same school. Aby was pleasantly surprised to see me and clasped my hands in pure joy. Time was getting on to 5 PM and I thought it was time to say goodbye to them. However I decided to wait for Sicily to be free after giving teas and refreshments to her husband and sons.
The gate creaked open and in came some six or seven boys and three or four girls of age ranging from seven to ten talking and teasing and laughing. What a happy bunch! I thought to myself. I glanced at Elia Kochamma who for a fleeting moment looked slightly ill at ease. It might have been my imagination for her expression had resumed its usual serenity in the next instant. The children all had brought books with them and ignoring me completely sat down on the low wall still chatting and laughing. I wondered whether Elia Kochamma had taken up giving special tuition for these kids, for she had asked them to open up their workbook and start doing the exercises on a given page. 
She had gotten up from her chair and asked me to follow her to the vegetable patch. Then smilingly she said “I can see you are dying with curiosity. These children’s mothers are all working as housemaids and the fathers of the majority are deadbeats - either drunkards or downright lazy to be of any help in the matter of rearing them. I have often wondered how saintly these women are for putting up with such injustice and cruelty from their menfolk. These men have no compunction in spending whatever they earn for drinking liquor and afterwards abusing the poor women verbally and physically.’ 
She stopped for a moment, when she resumed her tone was tinged with sadness. “You see Sarakutty, we might logically expect that their sons witnessing all the misery of their mothers would certainly not follow in their father’s footsteps. But sadly, in my experience most sons turn out to be no better than the fathers and the cycle continues. How I wish there was some miracle cure for this social evil. What you see there” - this she said pointing to the veranda, where I saw Betty enthusiastically distributing biscuits to the kids - ‘is my feeble attempt for raising the moral standard of the kids. The biscuits are offered as an incentive. All I do is to help them develop their language skills and to kindle an interest in mathematics. Most days I tell them a story or an interesting social incident and encourage them to speak out their remarks or opinions, hoping that it would be good for their moral edification. ’ 
I stood there gazing at the frail woman in wonder and pride. Then I leaned forward and kissed her cheek.  “God bless you Elia Kochamma, May your endeavor bear fruit” I told her. 
We slowly walked back. I went in said goodbye to Sicily and Betty and Aby. The twins were sitting with the kids eating their share of biscuits. Elia Kochamma introduced me to the kids who stood up and waved “Bye” when I went out.
All through the return journey my mind dwelled on my visit. I was feeling peachy as the talk I had with her almost succeeded in quelling my disquietude about Jo. Her practical reasoning had blown most of my mental cobwebs away. Once Elia Kochamma had told me that why God gave us painful experiences - it was for making us sympathetic towards those having similar problems. I remember wondering then on the odds of ‘similar problems’. Now I understood what made her say so. I felt that the many insinuations my friends were apt to make with regard to Jo could now be brushed aside if not with a big smile, at least with equanimity.
When I reached home, I was surprised to see the gate half open. Avarachan couldn’t have returned so early. I felt rather uneasy and without opening the front door, I just walked around to have a peep at my side veranda. My intuition proved right! There was Mercy comfortably sitting on my comfortable cane chair looking over a magazine. Seeing me, she stood up and declared that as I was not at home she was on the point of leaving. The reason for her visit was mainly because she had to while away some time before her daughter came back after her dentist’s appointment. I asked her to wait and after opening the front door went to the side veranda from the inside. I offered to make tea for her, which she gladly accepted. 
Mercy accompanied me to the kitchen and while I made tea, kept up a flow of small talk. There was some truth in Avarachan’s nicknaming her ‘chatterbox’. But I didn’t let it bother me much usually as she was seldom offended at not receiving a prompt reply to her sundry queries. But now something she asked caught my attention. As I was straining tea into the cups I was spared the necessity of giving an immediate reply. Her query was what made Alex split with his partner, Koshy. I decided to prevaricate by asking if she preferred her tea with or without sugar. 
Then realizing that for once Mercy was waiting for my reply, I asked, ‘Who told you this Mercy? I have not heard anything about this from Alice Kochamma.’ Technically speaking this was true
Mercy was only too glad to elaborate. “You see Sarakutty, my nephew working in Chennai is related to Koshy and he says Alex is on to some ambitious project which has landed him in great financial difficulty” I suppressed my inward turmoil and lightly put in “Oh! I am sure these hard core business people always know how to get out of tough situations.”
I was relieved when she lost interest in the topic and asked me where I had gone to when she came. Before I could reply she gave a gasp as she noticed the time. In no time she gathered her bag and saying a hasty ‘see you later’ made her exit. Just as quickly she popped back and handing me a paper said ‘Sarakutty, my sister-in-law met your old friend Nancy and was asked specifically to get her contact number to you. Now I really got to run.’
For a minute time froze and my mind made a small time-travel to the happy days I spent with Nancy who was dear Achen’s daughter. 
Over dinner, I mentioned what Mercy had divulged about Alex. Though he didn’t say anything then, I could sense that Avarachan was brooding over what Mercy said. My hunch was proved right when the next morning he went over to Achayan’s and came back with the information that Alex was indeed grappling with the dire situation he was in. Avarachan added that Achayan was deeply worried over the issue. 
“How I wish we could somehow help out” I said. 
‘Well! Haven’t we done what we could do, Sara?” Avarachan replied.
Soon Easter holidays were about to begin. From Alice Kochamma I came to know that Sally might come over for a short visit. That was certainly something to look forward to. I mentally calculated that when Sally returned after Easter, there would be just one month more to go before Jo came back. 




Two days later Geetha paid me a visit. Though Hari and Jo had been school mates, Geetha was some fifteen years my junior. I always had a special liking for her and often felt that she could have been my younger sister. She was the typical ‘jolly good fellow’ who found in most situations something to laugh about. 
But the minute she stepped into the side veranda I sensed that something was terribly wrong with her: Her usual merry eyes were puffy from weeping and her voice gruff. I was about to ask “What happened, Geetha?’ when without any preamble she put her arms around me and started to sob her heart out. I was so alarmed that I could find no words to comfort her. I just patted her back and kept on urging her to tell me what the matter was. 
After a few minutes, she was able to collect herself and decided to unburden her worries. However she wanted to make sure that I was all alone in the house. She softly began ‘Saraunty, I am going to tell you something which we haven’t ever told anyone save my mother.” Hearing this I felt my pulse racing and for an instant I fought against my impulse to prevent her from confiding in me. The moment passed and then I took hold of her hand and said “Yes, Geetha, tell me” and waited. 
When she opened her mouth to speak it was barely above a whisper ‘It is about Hari, Saraunty.’ My first fear was whether he was seriously ill or something and I voiced it. 
‘Oh, no! He is alright and doing well in his job at Bangalore. You see, though he and Jo are classmates, our Hari is one year older to Jo and for some time now, friends and relatives have been urging him to get married to some nice girl preferably employed in Bangalore. Last week, a very close friend of Hari’s father has proposed his niece also working in Bangalore. He showed us her photograph, a very charming girl indeed.’ 
She paused. ‘We know the girl’s parents and the families match so well that we can’t find any objection to stall the proposal.” Again she paused. Her face clouded and her eyes began to well up again.
This time I intervened ‘No, no my dear, don’t start to cry again. Out with it whatever it is.’ 
‘Saraunty, the thing is I find it difficult to tell even you, though I know for sure you are the only person who would understand our plight. Yes, Sara I am going to tell you the whole thing then maybe you can suggest what is to be done. I was married at twenty soon after graduation. Raviyettan was twenty-seven and working as an Engineer in the Electricity Department. He was very fond of children and wanted to start a family right away. But our prayers were not answered. So after two years we sought medical help and their finding was that there was practically no chance of Raviyettan fathering a child. Though utterly dejected over the diagnosis we kept it a secret. At the bottom of our hearts we toyed with the idea of adopting a child, but dared not tell our families for fear of disclosing Raviyettan’s problem. We felt they would not welcome the idea, for the time being at least.
It was around this time that Raviyettan got a chance to work in a Bhutan Hydel Project. We grabbed the opportunity and went to that remote place where we were pretty sure not to find a single Malayalee. There we made friends with the Medical Officer of the Project hospital. She was a very nice Tamilian married to an engineer like Raviyettan. The doctor was a kind and sympathetic person and I once confided in her about my plight. She was also supportive for our adopting a child. Towards the end of the first year, the doctor informed me that the nurses at the hospital had found an abandoned infant and had been trying to find the mother. They knew her to be a young Telugu girl but their attempts to locate her turned out to be futile even after one week. Upon the doctor’s suggestion I went with her to see the child. An elderly nurse was trying to feed him from a bottle which the poor mite didn’t obviously relish. For such an underweight baby his loud wailing was a bit surprising. He was dark complexioned and not a particularly attractive baby at that. 
Soon I left the hospital and as I walked back to our quarters the reason behind the doctor’s action struck me with such force that as soon as I reached home I phoned Raviyettan and asked if he could come back home a little early. So that day, I made a second visit to the hospital this time along with Raviyettan. I didn’t tell the doctor about our proposed visit. The elderly nurse must have gone off duty. A much younger one was administering to a patient at the far end of the ward. The little one was sleeping peacefully in his cradle, torn bits of blankets covering his frail body. I watched Raviyettan through the corner of my eye and inaudibly caught my breath at seeing the wistfulness in his expression. Then he whispered. “Geetha if we had a son, he might probably have looked like this one” I knew what he meant by that. He was also of dark complexion. 
That evening we talked with the doctor and the very next day we took him from the hospital to our quarters. I had a little experience with babies of my elder sister. It was understood that if the baby’s parents turned up to claim him we would hand him over. But as nobody came to claim him we made plans to adopt him legally. We still didn’t want our people to know about the adoption plan.
Hence we immediately contacted my mother and requested her to come and stay with us for one year at least on the ground that I was homesick and feeling poorly. As we had anticipated people at home jumped to the conclusion that I was going through the first phase of pregnancy. We had tactfully suggested that if Amma could come up to her brother’s house in Calcutta, Raviyettan could easily collect her from there. Amma got the shock of her life when she stepped into our quarters and saw baby Hari in my arms. However we had to make a confidant of her and without any fuss she agreed to keep mum about the true state of affairs. As Amma had a very fine streak of kindness in her she effortlessly eased into the role of a doting grandmother. As for me, Sara, Hari was everything I wanted in a son and we couldn’t thank God Almighty well enough for his reward. It was decided that we would stay in Bhutan for three more years at least. However Amma went back after a year flashing little Hari’s news to all and sundry in our family circle. When we finally returned it was time for Hari to start kindergarten and you know the rest, Saraunty.” 
Geetha stopped her narrative and looked at me expecting some comment. I tried my best to hide my bewilderment at the revelation but I must have definitely failed to do that for Geetha wailed ‘Oh! Saraunty even you can’t offer any solution to our problem, can you?’
However her question brought me out of my stupor and I quickly replied “Geetha dear, I can understand you are going through a rough patch but let us not assume that it has no solution.’ Then I filled her in about my recent visit to Elia Kochamma and what she had said to me to alleviate any anxieties about Jo. 
‘But Saraunty, in your case, Johnny is fully aware that he is adopted and has accepted it well. Our Hari is in the dark about it (and that is what makes our nights sleepless). The question whether to tell him or not to is running round and round in our minds and if we were to tell him now what will be his reaction? Or shall we keep it a secret forever and proceed with the marriage proposal as everyone expects us to? The worry over this issue is driving us crazy.’
Both of us fell silent for some time.
Then I began “Geetha, even though there appears to be no miracle solution, the mental strain due to the present proposal could be got rid of by conveying to them that you had decided to consider proposals after a period of one year at least.
But Saraunty, it is such a desirable proposal, you know” put in Geetha.
I did not make any comment to that but proceeded to enlighten her with the practical wisdom Elia Kochamma had shown in choosing a wife for her son. I hastened to add that I was not advising them in any way to accept a girl with some physical disability like Sicily. But if they were deciding to keep the adoption part a secret it may augur well for his future happiness if they purposely gave second place for the girl’s looks or the social status of her family. Geetha’s eyes started to follow the path of a monarch butterfly absentmindedly, which meant she was mulling over what I had just conveyed. Then she looked up and for the first time a ghost of a smile hovered about her lips and she said “Thank you Saraunty. I always knew you would come up with some practical suggestion. Thank God after so many days I am beginning to see a ray of light at the end of the tunnel. I will certainly keep you posted on what we are going to decide.” As she got up to leave I caught hold of her hand and said “Your secret is safe with me. Geetha - I won’t tell anyone not even Avarachan.” I know that Saraunty” she said simply.
After Geetha left, I sat there mentally rewinding our conversation. And I thought how providential it was that I had visited Elia Kochamma. Suddenly the image of a laughing Hari flashed across my mind and I prayed earnestly that the happiness and harmony of the trio may last forever.




The next day was Palm Sunday. I met Alice Kochamma at Church. She said Sally was coming on Wednesday and would be leaving after Easter. Her final year at College was starting after the holidays. As I knew Thali had a special liking for my ‘mavunda’, I decided to make some for her. While I was getting things ready the telephone rang and it was Geetha. She began “Oh! Saraunty can you believe it? This morning Hari called us and said that his company was sending him to the US for one year’s service there. God Almighty has indeed heard our prayers and spared us the worry of taking an immediate decision.’ 
‘I am very glad to hear the news Geetha’ I told her.
‘One more thing, Saraunty. Raviyettan is deeply impressed by the practical wisdom of Elia Kochamma.’
‘She is a gem of a lady, Geetha’ I said.
When I had finished making the ‘mavundas’ and put them away in containers, I wished Jo could also come home and eat them. I knew it was only wishful thinking but I couldn’t shake the mild depression the thought brought on. The telephone rang again and this time it was Susy Ammama. She was in an excited mood. She told me that she had just returned after attending the wedding of her friend’s son. The exciting part was that there she had met the most suitable girl for our Jo. She was her friend’s niece, aged around 23 years, very pretty and working in a nationalized bank. Susymama volunteered to get a photo of the girl and to send it to us without delay. 
Susy Ammama’s enthusiasm must have been catching for as soon as I put down the receiver my mood had changed. I found myself in a slight flutter. I could hardly wait for Avarachan to come back home from the club. However, when he did return I felt reluctant to disclose the news. I decided to wait until I saw the girl’s photo. But that didn’t prevent me from indulging in daydreaming about the appearance and behavior of the girl. In my imagination the girl was neither too modern nor too timid. She would be a friendly girl with many common interests. I, on my part, would be a doting mother-in-law with whom the girl could be quite at ease. And with whom Avarachan would be quite at ease too. 
Next week we got the photo and I showed it to Avarachan. We both agreed that the girl was pretty and smart looking. But the fact that I found her a little too much self-assured I kept to myself. I kept it in my Bible and intended to show it to Jo when he returned. Avarachan advised me to keep it in the almirah. He thought it best not to tell Jo anything for the time being. After all the boy was not yet 26, he said. From what he said I gathered that he was not particularly interested in the proposal. As for me my mind was in a state of confusion in the sense that I did not know what I expected in our daughter-in-law. 
That night I tried to glean what Avarachan’s expectations were as regards a daughter-in-law but failed to get any concrete views. He felt that an Engineer girl would be fine but someone in teaching profession would be equally welcome. The girl need not be a raving beauty but a truly affectionate and compassionate girl would be an asset. When I told him it was well-nigh impossible to gauge anyone’s disposition just by looking at them, he remarked there was no hurry in selecting just somebody. Then just before falling asleep, he said “I think, Thara, God has already chosen the most suitable one for our boy, just as He had for me.”
On Wednesday I woke up early and set about getting the breakfast ready. I knew that Sally’s train usually arrived very early in the morning and I could expect her visit soon after breakfast. But when she didn’t turn up till noon, I couldn’t shake off the gnawing premonition. Perhaps she might not have come after all I told myself. But that thought didn’t cheer me up either. It was while washing up after lunch that I heard the calling bell ring. Depression gave way to a sudden surge of happiness and I almost ran up to the front door and opened it. There she stood with a smile that didn’t quite reach up to her eyes and holding out her hands to me. Ignoring her outstretched hands I clasped her in a tight embrace and kissed her cheeks. Something seemed to have thawed within her and she returned my kiss saying “How I missed you Tharaunty!”
She walked towards her favorite sofa and sat down half reclining. I sat opposite her and said. ‘You have lost weight my dear, were you ill or something?’ 
She didn’t answer my question but asked “When is Jocha coming back?” 
“Next month” I said ‘would you like to see some photos he sent?” Without waiting for her reply I got them and gave her. 
I watched her while she was viewing the photos. A great change had come over our ‘Thali’. She seemed to have aged beyond her actual years. Gone was the childlike enthusiasm. It seemed as if she had gone through some unhappy and unexpected circumstances. To our old ‘Thali’ I would have demanded to know what the matter was but this young lady was almost like a stranger with whom one daren’t take liberties. ‘Let her come out of her shell in her own good time’ I told myself.
However I was soon happily surprised to notice that she was viewing the photos in earnest, taking time over some in particular. Then she put them all back in the envelope and handed it to me. There was a glimmer of mischievous amusement in her tone as she said “Tharaunty, Jocha seems to be having the time of his life over there. From what I have seen from the photos I won’t be surprised if he returned with a cute French girl in tow”.
Sally’s comment and the way in which she said it made me throw my head back and laugh out with gay abandon. Seeing my reaction, Sally too joined in and it took us both quite some time to sober up. I was mightily pleased that the incident had cleared the strained situation. Now I could ask what bothered her but still I hesitated. 
‘Tharaunty, do you remember the last time I came over here? Nearly one year ago, you would tell me, I am sure. To me it seems like ten years.’
She jerkily stood up and took a step towards me and ended up by sinking to the floor by my feet. The next instant she put her face down on my lap and started sobbing her heart out. All I could do to console her was to put out my hands and stroke her face and hair. I knew that tears had been streaming down my cheeks too which I didn’t bother to mope. After what seemed like an eternity the girl stopped sobbing but made no effort to change her position. She was utterly spent. It was heart rending to see an occasional sob shaking her frail body.
I knew I had to do something to get the child out of her pathos. 
“Thali dear, get up and go and wash your face like a good girl. I shall get you a hot cup of tea.” I said and gently helped her to get up. ‘I have made something especially for you dear. I will meet you in the verandah.’ Saying this, I went to the kitchen and made her tea and took it with it a plate of mavundas.
The garden did not let me down - talk about flower power coupled with noisy parrots. The parrots were everywhere busy cracking open sunflower heads with their dainty red beaks. The guava tree peeping from around the corner was one of their regular haunts. There was no way anybody could feel lonely amidst their raucous screams. Sally was standing and enjoying them. Hearing my footsteps she turned, came forward and took the tray out of my hands and put it on the coffee table. A smile of genuine happiness spread over her face as she snatched a mavunda. “How do you make them so tasty Saraunty? she asked while munching. After eating and drinking the hot tea, she leaned back on the not-so-comfortable chair obviously relaxed. 
‘Tharaunty, I wonder if you know the actual state of our affairs at Chennai. Maybe I shouldn’t be talking about it to anyone but you are not just anybody. So be prepared to hear my sob story.’ 
Then she paused lost in thought for a while. I got the feeling that she was not conscious of my presence but was in a way talking out loud to herself. Of course she was facing me but her gaze wandered over the many objects in the garden and the verandah as well. 
‘One night you call out a happy and carefree ‘Goodnight’ to your parents and the by the time you sit up for breakfast your familiar, cozy world has disrupted into a million tiny fragments. How does one cope with the situation Tharaunty? During these past months I have many times wished for a younger sibling. At least she or he could have been somebody to hold hands with. You see Papa and Amma were completely immersed in their world of misery failing to comprehend how the situation could affect me. I think in their view there was nothing I need to worry over, having been provided with all the usual amenities I was used to. They took great care not to discuss the situation in my hearing. And even when they put me in the hostel for the last semester it was on the pretext that it would be ideal for doing ‘combine study’ with my friends. I wondered why I was not encouraged to visit home during those six months. As the final exam was nearing I had little time to brood over things. In the evening after the final exam, Amma came to pick me up from the hostel. On the way she casually told me that due to some inconvenience, they had sold our spacious house with the beautiful garden and moved into a rented two bedroom flat as a temporary arrangement. You can’t imagine the shock the news gave me! I remember turning sharply to look at Amma but she nonchalantly drew my attention to the peculiar shape of a new building. That was five days ago. Personally I don’t mind living in the flat one bit but keeping me in the dark about the extent of our financial crisis has been driving crazy these days. I think they simply consider “little Sally” is just someone to be cossetted. Anyway the very next day Papa made arrangements for my travel and here I am hopefully for 2-3 weeks.
I didn’t know how to respond to her monologue. The parrots did though - as if on cue they all took off. I knew I had to say something to reassure her.
“Oh! I am sure everything will come out alright Thali”, I said breezily.
“Do you really think so, Tharaunty? Oh! God, if only this nightmare would soon be over! Don’t get me wrong, I don’t miss our old social status or the so called ‘elite’ friends and acquaintances at all.”
It was at the tip of my tongue to ask about Jo’s ‘wonder boy Anil’ and his family but I wisely checked it in time. I guessed that her friendship with that family was water under the bridge and not worth probing into.
“So nowadays you don’t see any of your old friends. Is that so, Thali?”
“Absolutely none, Tharaunty” she replied in a matter of fact tone. 
Then as an afterthought she continued “Honestly I can’t say whether it is a case of their shunning us or our avoiding them. Anyway, one good thing has emerged out of this wretched state of affairs. But for this present chaos and confusions I would not have realized what a misfit I would have been in the social life of my parents. I have a feeling that Pinky might have reveled in it, but no, not me I am sure of it. Well, surely there is some truth to the adage clouds and their silver lining.’
Just then the telephone rang and Sally jumped up saying ‘Oh dear that must be Amachy calling me. She had asked me to accompany her to visit her cousin who is in the hospital.’
Sally was right. She dashed out after telling me to convey her regards to Unki as she called Avarachan. The time was well past 5’o clock. Avarachan was due to return from work within half an hour. I ought to be getting up and get his tea ready. But I couldn’t budge out of my chair even if I wanted to. Sally’s news had so numbed my senses. Finally it was the sound of our old car making its way into the garage that got me out of my stupor. 
I went straight to the kitchen for making tea. By the time Avarachan sat down to drinking tea, I had regained my composure to some extent. I would have waited until after supper to talk about Sally’s revelations, but when Avarachan got up and said he was going to Achayan’s to give him some document, I involuntarily detained him.
“Let us go over to our bedroom, I want to tell you something’ and led the way. He followed me and sat down on the chair by the table while I slumped on the bed. As I had no time to arrange my thoughts into a coherent statement what impact the tumbling words made on him I couldn’t make out immediately. His facial expression hadn’t changed much. But the way he sat motionless for minutes after I had stopped talking clearly gave away his mental agitation.
“Aacha, do you think Achayan knows about the situation?”
My question brought him back to the present. He got up and said “Let me go and find out.”
When Avarachan didn’t return immediately, I knew that the brothers would be discussing the situation. ‘God please show a way to solve the problem,’ I prayed silently.
He came back as I was laying the table for supper. Seeing his brooding expression I thought it prudent not to ask him anything right away. We had our supper almost silently. Though he went to the drawing room and turned on the TV as usual, after a few minutes he had switched it off and was gazing vacantly over the newspaper which was unusual for him. I had finished washing up and after locking the kitchen door came and sat beside him on the sofa.
‘Well, Thara,’ he began ‘Achayan and Kochamma are so worried over the issue that I fear for their health.’
“Aacha, what exactly is the hitch?” I asked. 
“From what I gathered from Achayan, there could be the possibility of an out of court settlement. But the plaintiff is demanding such an enormous amount that it almost amounts to blackmailing which Alex is refusing to succumb to. He stubbornly holds the view that justice is on his side and hence the court decision will be in his favor.”
What I heard filled my heart with fear or rather terror, when I thought about Sally.
“How would it end, Aacha?’ I couldn’t keep the note of fear from my voice.
I don’t know anything about court proceedings and all. All we can do is pray to God for showing a solution,” he said.
We were about to turn in when the phone pealed. Wondering who could be calling us this late, I took it up and to my surprise it was Jo. He usually called on Saturday nights. Apparently he wanted a copy of his Degree Certificate for some purpose. He then enquired whether the court case of Alex had been amicably settled. As we were so worried over the issue, I found myself giving him a brief account of the dire situation he was in.
There was a pause at Jo’s end for a few seconds. He then asked for Avarachan. After Avarachan took over all I could hear were some ‘I see’ and ‘Aye’ and ‘No’. His final response ‘Yes we will wait for your call’ made me wonder what had transpired. He came over and sitting beside me took my hand and said with a ghost of his boyish grin. 
“What is it they say Thara, about any port in a storm? Well this may not exactly be a port, but it certainly is something to take our minds off the extreme strain”.
“What is it Aacha? What did Jo say”? I asked eagerly.
‘He says his friend who went with him, his name is Subramony by the way, has an old uncle who is a veteran Civil Cases’ advocate in Chennai. Even though he has retired from practicing people still approach him for expert advice. Our Jo is planning to ask his friend if he could arrange Alex and his lawyer to meet his uncle for getting his opinion. Anyway he will call us tomorrow and inform the outcome.’
“Thank you Lord”, I said.
‘Let us pray that Subramony’s uncle would soon find some way for ending the deadlock.’



The next day while I was cooking in the kitchen one part of my mind was busy making speculations about Jo’s plan. It was almost noon and as Avarachan would not be coming for lunch I thought of having it early and rest for a while. But hardly half an hour had passed when Avarachan unexpectedly returned from office.
My apprehension about his unexpected arrival must have been evident from my facial expression because Avarachan immediately told me that Jo had phoned him to convey what his friend asked him to do. Subramony’s uncle wanted to meet Alex and his advocate so that he could go through the case file and get a clear picture.
‘So I am now going to tell Achayan to talk with Alex. I do not want to do this over phone because this option can be slayed in many ways then. Really Thara, I doubt whether Alex’s advocate would relish the idea of seeking another’s opinion. Anyway I shall inform Achayan all this in person and that is all we can do. ‘
Part of my mind registered Jo’s prompt action with a proud satisfaction while another felt uneasy, the exact reason of which I couldn’t pinpoint. When I had poured out the sorry state of affairs into Jo’s ears, neither Avarachan nor me had never expected him to intervene the way he had. Now that he came up with a practical, helpful suggestion, a nagging feeling as to whether Alice Kochamma might find Jo’s interference irksome crept into my heart. Whether Alex would welcome the idea was yet another point of worry because to Alex, Jo could very well be a non-entity not worth paying any attention. Underlying all these worries and anxieties was some sort of wonder mixed with uncertainty as regards Jo’s taking charge of the situation. The Jo we knew was a loving and kind-hearted boy who was only too willing to help out anyone in need. But the new Jo who appeared to be confident in leading from the forefront, I somehow found difficult to come to terms with. My misgivings could very well be the result of my mental strain of the last few days, I reasoned with myself. I heartily wished Avarachan would come back soon. 
Avarachan returned after one hour. As the time was getting on to 2’o clock, we had our lunch right away. Half way through he began to talk about the matter. After their early lunch both Achayan and Alice Kochamma were leisurely eating their dessert of mangoes. They were naturally surprised to see Avarachan. When Avarachan explained his errand, Alice Kochamma voiced her lack of enthusiasm in consulting an advocate who was out of actual practicing for several years. She said that Alex had engaged the most sought after advocate and as such there was little likelihood of his wanting to meet Subramony’s uncle. Then he paused for some moments. The reason was simple. I had made his favorite tapioca dish and fish curry. He already had a good helping but craved some more. I smartly moved plates around and served him rice and vegetables which to my mind would be good for him health-wise.
“Well, what was Achayan’s view?” I asked.
“Achayan said that what Alice Kochamma felt could very well be the case, but then there was no harm in telling Alex. Let him decide. Saying this, he took up the phone and conveyed the news to Alex.’ Avarachan stopped there. 
But I badly wanted to know what exactly had Achayan told Alex. Avarachan being a man of few words could never understand the feminine curiosity for details. A direct request would only irritate him, I knew from experience. An indirect probe might prove more fruitful, I decided. Avarachan had finished eating and got up saying “You sure know how to make delicious tapioca fish curry, Thara.” As he settled in the verandah in the comfortable chair with the newspaper I took a ripe mango, knife and plate and went and sat beside him peeling it. “Aacha, I wonder if Alex knows our boy’s name even” I said and waited for his reply. 
As I had hoped my comment provoked him to answer. “I don’t know whether he knew Jo’s full name before, but now I am sure he knows it pretty well. Hey! What do you think Alex replied when Achayan first told him about meeting Subramony’s uncle? By the way his name is Narayana Iyer. Well, Alex replied what Alice Kochamma felt he would. As there was nothing more to do, I was about to depart when the phone rang and to everyone’s utter surprise, it was Alex on the other end asking for Narayana Iyer’s phone number and address. Alex explained that as soon as he had put down the receiver his lawyer had called him to say something. Alex had casually asked him whether he had heard about a Narayana Iyer of yester years. From his advocate Alex learned that the venerable lawyer was considered the ‘greatest ever’ for dealing with civil cases. When Alex told him they had a chance to meet him for seeking his advice, the latter couldn’t contain his elation and was all for meeting him at the earliest.” He paused, looked at me and not attempting to hide the glee he felt said “The high and mighty are sometimes made to eat the humble pie, aren’t they Thara?”
As I myself was choking with pride, I didn’t answer immediately.
Avarachan was heartily eating the mango slices and in between bites he continued “Well to cut a long story short, I gave him the details he wanted and waited. As I expected, then came Alex’s humble query to know our boy’s official name and the name of his friend. Now Thara, you should have seen our Alice Kochamma’s face. If I had stayed there one second longer, I would have laughed my heart out, seeing her bafflement.”
“Oh! I am so glad to hear about this Aacha. But I wonder whether any good will come out of it.” I said.
“Let us leave it to God Almighty, girl. Anyway we have done what we could.”
Yes, indeed, all we could do now was to pray for a happy outcome.
During the whole next day my mood was uneasily brooding for some news from Alex. I took to weeding as that mundane task was an assured stress reliever. But somehow the anxiety lingered till Sally came around 5’oclock in the evening. As a matter of fact Sally didn’t have anything concrete to convey other than the fact Subramony’s uncle had given Alex an appointment and that he and his advocate would be meeting him the next day.
After Sally went, I leaned back in my chair and closed my eyes in a rather relaxed mood. It was so heartening to see the girl if not exactly happy and carefree, but definitely less tense with a hint of her old sparkle. Though she didn’t dwell much on the issue, it was clear that Jo’s intervention was seen as a lifeline in an impossible situation. “Oh God! Please make the attempt successful” I prayed fervently. As I felt my relaxed mood slipping fast, I got up to get Avarachan’s tea ready, resolutely putting the nagging worry to the far recesses of my mind. When Avarachan came home the first thing he asked was “Is there any news from Achayan’s? I told him the news Sally had conveyed.
In the evening, a church acquaintance of many years called me and in our conversation my dear Achen’s daughter Nancy’s name came up. It was while I was clearing the dining table, the thought of touching base with Nancy struck me. I quickly finished my chores in the kitchen. As soon as Avarachan left for his club, I would phone her, I decided. Nancy must be around 55 years, I reckoned. The last time I saw her was at Achen’s funeral some ten years back. She had two children I knew - a boy and a girl. The boy could be Joe’s age or a little older and the girl could be three or four years younger.
When I dialed the number that Mercy had given me it was Nancy’s daughter who picked up at the other end. I gave her my name and asked for Nancy. Her excited ‘Sarakutty, I was so waiting for your call’ made my heart so happy beyond words and we immediately plunged into exchanging news about our families. Her son Prakash was an engineer working in Bangalore. He was one year Jo’s senior. Her 24-year old Rinu had recently been appointed as Lecturer in Physics in the Govt. College. It was mainly for her daughter’s convenience that they had shifted their residence to the city. And I told her about Avarachan and Jo. When she earnestly asked me to visit them really, really soon I readily agreed. 
While we were having dinner I told Avarachan about Nancy and my proposed visit to her place. I added that I would take Sally along. My mind of its own volition was making speculations regarding Rinu. However, I decided to keep my thoughts to myself. From what I gathered from Nancy the journey wouldn’t take more than half an hour by bus. So if Sally and I started around 4 PM, we should be able to return before nightfall.
To my pleasant surprise, even the short walk up to the bus stop in Sally’s company did wonders for me after the past few days’ anxieties. Sally must also have felt the same because as we reached the stop she suggested that we skip that stop and walk on to the next one. “Oh Yes” I readily agreed and we sailed along happily talking and giggling like schoolgirls. It was as if I had locked up my usual sedate self in the house. As for Sally in no time her old chirpiness had surfaced calling my attention to this and that.
When we opened the gate, we found Nancy sitting in the veranda, obviously waiting for us. She was just as I remembered. She quickly came forward with outstretched hands and hugged me. ‘Sarakutty, I am so glad you came” she said again and again as we walked into the house. Then she turned and glanced at Sally quizzically. “Oh! I forgot to introduce Sally - she is Avarachan’s brother’s granddaughter. Now she is waiting for her Engineering results to come out.”
Then Nancy called out ‘Rinu, are you done with your work? Come and meet Sara and Sally.’
“I am almost done here. I will be there in a minute” Rinu responded. Presently we heard a side door open and there she was coming towards us with a welcoming smile on her face. The girl was simply beautiful. My imagination had conjured up a pretty girl but this vision before us was beyond my wildest fancy. We spent a most enjoyable one hour with them and then got up to leave. I invited them to come to our house which Nancy accepted.
As soon as we turned the corner, Sally burst out. “What a beauty! Sararunty, I heartily recommend her for our Jocha, what do you say?”
As I too have been thinking along the same lines, I quickly turned my face lest she should see the blush on my face.
“You see Sally,” I began cautiously, ‘there is the question of the girl liking Jo.’
‘What do you mean Saraunty,’ Sally demanded ‘by implying that Jocha is not attractive? He is the most handsomest guy in the world.’ 
At her vehemence, I laughed out saying ‘You have made a double superlative statement, my girl. Anyway let us consider the case when he comes home.’
However I could hardly wait for Avarachan to return from the club. But when he did come, to my great irritation, I could not get his attention immediately. Because an old crony of his had called him up inviting him to the discussion they were going to hold with the collector regarding the road conditions. When the lengthy call finally ended Avarachan was in a jovial mood to regale me with some hilarious incidents in their student days. I decided to wait until after dinner to tell him about our visit to Nancy. As soon as dinner was over and I began to wash up, the telephone rang again. This time it was Alex conveying the news that they had met Narayana Iyer who had received them most cordially. Alex’s lawyer briefed him about the situation and handed copies of the relevant documents. Then he said that after studying the file he would contact them. Before ending the conversation Alex mentioned that his lawyer was very hopeful though he himself would rather keep his fingers crossed as regards the outcome.
Alex’s call had somehow put a brake on my excited mood. “Well, I can tell him tomorrow” I told myself and went to bed.



It was the shrill ringing of the telephone that woke me up early in the morning. ‘Who could be calling this early,’ I wondered and jumped out of bed. It was my elder sister Gracemama calling from Australia, to inform that she and her grandson Kevin would be arriving at our place in two weeks’ time for a short visit. She added that it was mainly a sightseeing tour and that she had planned a short stay with us. I told her we would be most happy to receive them and chatted for a few minutes exchanging news about our families. 
As the day hadn’t yet broken, I went back to bed again though not to sleep but to quietly digest the news about Gracemama’s impending visit. The robins’ serenade to the rising sun from the garden played as the background score. I knew that the news ought to make me happy and eager to meet my sister whom I hadn’t seen for at least a decade. But in the case of us siblings, the saying “out of sight, out of mind” more or less summed up the situation. Hence it was with a slight feeling of apprehension that I got up to start the day. During breakfast I told Avarachan the news, who was genuinely glad and wished that if Jo could come a fortnight earlier, it would have been really nice.
When Sally came around in the morning, I told her about Gracemama’s visit. Her immediate response was ‘Saraunty, I never knew you had a sister.”  
‘Not just one, but two Thali dear’ I told her.
‘Well, well, it sure sounds interesting, I haven’t so far met anyone settled Down Under, Saraunty’ Sally said. ‘In the movies Australian accent sounds different from British accent. We can verify it with your sister and grand-nephew.’
‘In that case, this is your golden chance’ I told her.
“Saraunty, Ammachy asks whether you have any drumsticks to spare because she wants to make her favorite Avial today.”
“Oh yes” I said and gave her two longish ones.
As I watched Sally go, I thought how amazing it was that a few moments in the girl’s company had cleared my mind of the morning’s apprehension. It was as if she had opened a tiny window in my heart bringing in sunshine and a cool breeze. 
As I was busy in the kitchen preparing lunch, my mind was also busy speculating on Gracemama’s arrival, Nancy’s probable visit, and even on my pet wish to take Sally to meet Elia Kochamma. Lunch was ready, I was about to go to the side verandah for reading the newspaper when I heard running feet outside and an incessant knock on the front door. “Who could it be” I wondered and peeped through the window. It was Sally her face flushed. Hardly had I opened the door, when the girl caught me in a tight embrace and kissed my cheek muttering over and over again ‘Oh Saraunty, Thank God, I am so happy” with tears running down her cheeks. 
I somehow led her to the sofa and asked rather sternly “What happened Sally? Tell me.”
Sally dragged me to the side veranda instead and made me deposit myself on my comfortable cane chair. Sitting aside me she began excitedly “Saraunty, miracles do happen in this age also. Appa just called to tell us that Jocha’s friend’s uncle had dug up an old Supreme Court verdict on a somewhat similar case favoring the defendant. Though the norms and terms are different Jocha’s friend’s uncle has given them a directive on how to circumvent the obstacle that is in our way. Apparently then the cases align well and can be used as a reference. Appa’s lawyer says he was aware of this case but could not fathom the aligning trick. Now Appa’s lawyer is fully confident that they can win the case. The next hearing is after three weeks, we have to be patient until then.”
 “Oh! Thali, this is the grandest news we have had for weeks.” Even as I said this, a small voice was whispering within me. “What if it does not turn out as expected?” I wanted to quell the voice but it would not let be.
So I cautiously began “Sally dear, the news is indeed beyond our wildest hopes but let us not be over hopeful. As they say there could be many a slip between the cup and the lip.’ 
The girl sobered up immediately and said in clear tones. “But you don’t understand my feelings, Saraunty. Now it is okay with me even if the verdict is unfavorable to Appa. Though I can’t explain it in so many words, in my view Appa’s stand has been vindicated. You see, Saraunty even if he wins the case it is going to be an uphill task, if not an impossible one for him to get started again. I don’t know whether it is a trick of my mind, but the fact is somehow my mental turbulence is a thing of the past. I am convinced that with God’s grace we will overcome all difficulties”. 
It was my turn to be wonderstruck. Our little Thali had indeed grown up. Her face was serene, her gaze steady. She suddenly leaned towards me and pecked me thrice on the cheek with “Thank you Tharaunty, Thank you Jocha, Thank you Unki” and was gone. I gazed at my flowers absently and then blinked. Was it my imagination or did they toss up their heads suddenly!
Achayan had phoned Avarachan at his office and conveyed the news. So it was in a jubilant mood that Avarachan returned home. However Sally’s assessment of the situation had a sobering effect on him. It didn’t stop him from taking me out to dinner though. 
Now Gracemama’s visit was the uppermost priority in my mind. I had to straighten Jo’s room and the guest room for them. As I had dispensed with Anna Chedathy’s service long ago, in consideration of her old age, I myself had to do all the cleaning up which left me little time for anything else. Yet the thought of Nancy and her daughter often cropped up in my mind as a pleasant interlude. So far I hadn’t mentioned my secret wish to Avarachan. I decided it best to wait until they paid a return visit so that his impression of the girl might not be marred by any comment of mine. 
During the next week, I even saw Sally once or twice only. It seemed she was also busy applying for suitable jobs in Chennai. Like her father she had also chosen Architecture as her major and had hopes of becoming a proficient architect under his guidance. Under the present circumstances, however, she had better secure a job with some reputed firm. Her results were due to be published without delay. So, on the whole she was in a world of her own. 
Looking back on Gracemama’s visit which lasted for two days only, there were not any incidents or impressions worthy of recall. Gracemama was a well preserved seventy plus who could hold her own in any elite company. This I noted with a vicarious satisfaction when I took her and Kevin for a courtesy visit to Achayan’s. Kevin was a handsome, well-behaved twenty-five year old. As he couldn’t speak Malayalam, it naturally fell on Sally to keep him amused. Though her English was fluent she said she found it difficult to follow his Australian drawl. But that didn’t prevent them from having a hilarious time as their loud laughter and joviality indicated.
Before they went back Gracemama confided in me that she had an idea for finding a suitable Malayalee girl for Kevin. She said that she found Sally nice enough for him and wondered if her people might relish the idea. All I could tell her was that I would let her know if any such proposal came from their side. Actually watching Alice Kochamma’s expressions, I had an inkling that she might have welcomed an alliance. Moreover Sally seemed quite friendly and at ease with Kevin.
The day after Gracemama and Kevin left, Alice Kochamma and Achayan paid us a visit which was very unusual to say the least. It was just as I had surmised. They did want to know whether Kevin’s family would welcome Sally’s proposal. In their view, God alone knew how long it would take Alex to be in a position to conduct her marriage as he did Pinky’s. I diplomatically said that I would enquire and let them know. They further wanted me to gather from Sally whether she would be interested in the proposal. It was on the tip of my tongue to ask why they themselves couldn’t ask the girl. Well, I didn’t voice it though.
Next day Sally came around in the evening. Her results had come out. She had passed with distinction. I heartily congratulated her. I also gave her the three kurta’s I had purchased for her in anticipation of this news. She told me that she was leaving the next day as she had a job interview lined up in three days’ time. She asked me to pray for her as it was a very good firm. The salary offered was also quite good for an entry-level position. I didn’t know how to probe her views on matrimony. Yet I had to as I knew Alice Kochamma would expect me to ask her.
A playful approach would be best, I decided. “Hey Thali, I know somebody who would like you to be her daughter-in-law. What do you say?”  
Sally stared at me for a moment. Then she burst out laughing. “Oh! I can guess your ‘somebody’ Tharaunty. Really he is a nice guy. But no thanks, I won’t consider marrying anyone for at least five years.”
“Why that long my dear” I couldn’t resist asking. 
“Because my Appa needs my support to get out of the rut he is in. By the way, don’t forget to keep an eye on our beauty, Tharaunty. It would be such a pity if someone else snatched her up before Jocha arrives.”
I realized the girl was talking in earnest. So that was that. I’d inform both my sister and Alice Kochamma, which I did soon after she went back. 



Now there was just one more week to go for Jo to return. Such was my glee that I did not not know whether to sit or stand. So I plunged into a cooking spree and cleaning spree right away. Besides ‘mavunda’, I made ‘achappam’ also. There were only two more days to go and I was engrossed in baking a fruit cake when the phone rang. It was Nancy. She was in an excited mood. 
‘Sara, I have amazing news to tell you. We had put in a matrimonial ad for our Rinu in the newspaper and can you guess who responded? Of course there were many responses. But the one I am talking about is from your sister-in-law Susy Ammama for her grandson Sunil working in Bangalore. We understood the relation from the family details they had given. Sara, we want you to put in a good word for us and our girl.”
‘Oh, no!’ I cried inwardly. However I recovered quickly. “Most definitely, I will Nancy. In my view, you can take it as good as settled. By the way, our boy is also very nice, you see brilliant and handsome. I shall call Susy Amama right away. Bye”
I disconnected the call and dialed Susy Ammama simultaneously. I knew if I waited for even just a moment the conflicting emotions clamoring within me would have engulfed me in self-pity and bitterness. Instead, there I was extolling the virtues of the girl and her family sincerely to the eager ears of my sister-in-law.  It seemed Sunil had a preference for teacher girls as against Software Engineers like himself.
I put the receiver back in its cradle, found myself going to the side veranda and collapsing on my chair. I stared at the cobweb on the ceiling with unseeing eyes. Was it only yesterday Sally had warned me ‘to keep an eye on the beauty’? What an irony! I thought in utter dejection. Now even if Sunil’s proposal didn’t work out, we could never consider her for Jo. That wouldn’t appear proper to the family members. In my innermost self I knew that my unhappiness was baseless. Not even Avarachan knew about my wish. But that didn’t prevent the tears of self-pity from flowing down my cheeks and drenching the sides of my house dress. Suddenly the memory of dear Achen came to me and it snapped me out of my stupor. I moped up my cheeks in half-disgust. How could I be so selfish as not to be happy about the excellent marriage proposal his granddaughter had received? “Oh God! Please forgive me for my unkind thoughts.” 
Soon I got out of my chair, and after swiping the cobweb away resumed making the cake. I decided to call Sally in the evening to tell the news. After all, ‘her beauty’ was becoming a member of the family as Sunil’s wife. While working, I heartily thanked God that I hadn’t told Avarachan about Rinu.
When I called and told Sally she didn’t bother to hide her disappointment. She did not take too kindly to my explanation that ‘her beauty’ was still going to be her cousin’s wife. She had attended her job interview in the morning which went off reasonably well, she told me. Then there was another one coming up in a fortnight. And importantly, the hearing of the case was also scheduled towards the middle of next month. She didn’t make any remarks regarding their family atmosphere and I didn’t pry either. 
Jo’s flight was due to arrive at 4 PM. We reached the airport an hour earlier. Jo said that Subramony would be staying with us for the night.  When the arrival was displayed, I felt my pulses racing. I cast a sideways glance at Avarachan. True to his nature he was in a happy excited mood. What a blessed tension-free temperament! I thought with a tinge of envy. 
A steady string of passengers kept coming out. Then there they were two lanky guys pushing their luggage carts. Subramony was there in my area of vision but my eyes were fixed on Jo, who was scanning the crowd to locate us. Then he caught sight of Avarachan’s waving hand and murmuring something to Subramony swiftly came towards us. He spread out his arms and engulfed us both in a tight hug and then gave me a kiss on the cheek. My tension evaporated on seeing that our darling Jo was his old self. Subramony was promptly introduced and Avarachan invited him warmly to stay with us.  During the short homeward journey, Jo asked for news in the family and neighborhood. 
‘Is our Sally still hereabouts?’ he wanted to know.
When I told him that she had gone back to Chennai and was busy appearing for job interviews he said that he had brought a gift for her. 
Avarachan was mostly talking to Subramony. He was a nice boy with pleasant manners. 
Then abruptly Jo asked “What about Alex Uncle’s court case?”
I replied that the next hearing was to be around the middle of next week and then only we can know about the outcome. 
“Jo, I have got the guest room ready for your friend”, I said.
The car screeched to a halt at the gate and as I got out, I told the boys to have a shower and then come to the dining room to have tea and snacks.
As I had expected Jo was delighted to have his favorite ‘mavundas’. His friend preferred ‘achappams’ and cake. From his expression I knew that Avarachan’s cup of happiness was not only full but brimming over. I smiled involuntarily thinking that tomorrow his cronies at the club would be getting their fill of France.
Next day soon after breakfast Jo took Subramony to his quarters. The boys needed to report for duty after two days only so that they could rest after the long journey. As a matter of fact Jo was mostly sleeping the whole of next day. The day after the three of us visited Achayan and Alice Kochamma. Jo had bought small gifts for both. Achayan and AK had always been a little aloof with Jo, which under the circumstances was only to be expected. But unlike me, their attitude never seemed to affect either Jo or Avarachan. Both of them were too content with the cozy atmosphere of our little family to be bothered by other people’s behavior. 
But to put it mildly, this time I had the shock of my life. When we reached there, Achayan and Alice Kochamma were having their evening tea on the verandah. As soon as they saw us, to my utter surprise their faces literally lit up and Alice Kochamma actually came forward extending her hands towards Jo in warm welcome. If it surprised him too, he didn’t show it but clasped her hands smiling.
“France has been good for you, young man,’ observed Achayan with genuine warmth.
The way they accepted the gifts gladdened my heart. We didn’t tarry for long though and departed after partaking in the snacks Alice Kochamma provided. As there was little point in airing my views on their changed attitude to Avarachan, I kept mum. Jo’s involvement in Alex’s case must have brought the volte face I told myself.



The monsoon season had started in earnest, bringing in its wake an atmosphere of gloom and darkness. Even though I relished listening to the sound of rain during the night being snuggled under my blanket, the incessant drone during the daytime somehow depressed me. This was the one time when the garden could not even try to impress. Survival was at stake for many of them poor flowers, leaves and vines. I did not blame them at all for giving up on ‘heads held high’. The fair weather birds and the butterflies abandoned it unashamedly. 
If truth be said, the real reason for my depression was the disruption of the evening heart-to heart with Jo. I knew in my heart it was inevitable because of his promotion to a more responsible post. Our old cozy chats in the evenings were definitely a thing of the past; mainly because Jo seldom returned home as early as he used to do. On most days Avarachan was the first to come home making any intimate exchange of news with Jo well-nigh impossible. 
In whatever way I tried to rationalize the situation the endeavor gave me little solace. But the affection and warmth we shared hadn’t diminished at all and that was what mattered the most, I told myself. It was during those long evenings, my thoughts started to conjure up a vision of a lovely bride for Jo, who would of course be a lively companion for me. When I voiced my wish to Avarachan he discarded the idea outright saying that Jo was too young for marriage.
During the next week I scarcely got any free time. Sunil had come to meet Rinu and as I knew with certainty the alliance was Okayed. The betrothal was fixed to be on the coming Saturday and the marriage after a fortnight. Nancy asked me to accompany them on their wedding shopping which I gladly accepted and thoroughly enjoyed.
Although we were invited for both the betrothal and wedding Jo could attend only the former. At the time of marriage he would be away on an official tour. I was disappointed to learn that Sally would be attending only the marriage function because in my mind our family included her also.
The betrothal was a low key affair with only close relatives attending the function. The weather cooperated wonderfully and the day dawned bright and chirpy. The groom and the bride were a stunningly handsome couple and Nancy and Susymama were understandably proud and happy. Since Nancy and I had some friends in common I was in good company. Even Alice Kochamma was well impressed. After dinner, Jo and I went to meet the boy and the girl and formally congratulate them. The pre-France Jo would have been reluctant to meet them but the post-France Jo easily shook hands with Sunil and smilingly exchanged pleasantries with Rinu. To say ‘I was pleasantly surprised’ at Jo’s transformation would have been an understatement. I knew what would be Avarachan’s response if I related the incident to him - “What else did you expect my girl?”
When we reached home I couldn’t help exclaiming wistfully “What a beautiful girl! Lucky Susy Ammama!” 
“Oh Amme, do I hear a note of envy?” Jo teased laughingly. He patted my shoulder and said “Don’t worry Amma, by and by you will also be getting your own princess as Susy Ammachy.”
The word ‘princess’ stirred up a memory and it made me stare at him unseeingly.
‘Did I say something amiss, Amma?’ Jo asked anxiously.
‘Oh no! nothing Mone’ I told him. ‘Just that Avarachan had also told me the very same thing while you were away.’
‘So my Amma dear is pining for a beautiful daughter-in-law, isn’t it? But Amme, I don’t want to marry for at least two more years.’
‘I consider twenty-seven years to be the ideal age for boys to get married and raise a family. So let us not wait for more than one year, son’ I told him gently.
Suddenly Jo sat down near me on the sofa and taking my hand told me diffidently “Amme, really I haven’t so far considered the prospect of marriage mostly because, I am sort of scared about it.’
‘What is there to be scared of dear? We are not in any rush. You see, we will be looking for the most suitable girl for you, one with whom you could be at ease.’
‘I know you will be doing your best but the thing is I have a notion that these modern girls may find me rather repulsive.’
‘What do you mean by that Jo?’ I was stung to retort. ‘You should have heard our Sally’s assertion of you being ‘the most handsomest guy’ in the world.’
At this Jo laughed out in gay abandon and hugged me ‘Oh, bless her heart! Then it is a challenge for you Amme. If you can find out a replica of our Thali, I could be in my comfort zone, I think. But don’t tell her I said this, it may puff her up.’
‘You are saying this just because she has been the only girl who is a younger sister, niece, and friend all rolled into one whom you have known all your life or all her life, Jo. Yes, perhaps all things considered, your idea of waiting a year or two would be better, I think’ I said concluding the chat. 
The next week flew past with something or the other always cropping up demanding my attention or presence thus making it impossible for me to be worried over Jo’s misgivings. 
That week I blocked off half of Wednesday for my church acquaintance Gracy. Gracy was the closest to the battery bunny I knew. The amount of work she took on for the Church always amazed me. From the spiritual to the mundane no task was beneath her. Every year she and I did the flyers and the name tags for the annual bake sale at church. I had a very early lunch for I wanted to catch a quick forty of those winks before we started. Hardly did I finish washing up when the doorbell rang. ‘Thank God, you are up and about,’ she said preceding me to the side veranda. She must have sensed the wonder I felt for she presently said ‘Sarakutty, I have to meet a friend after this so I came a little earlier. Don’t mind me, go ahead and finish whatever you had pending and then join me.’ 
Gracy took her usual cane chair, leaned back and stretching her legs comfortably took in the view the garden offered. The multi-colored lantanas dotted the place in a graceful way. We got started almost immediately. I waited patiently for Gracy’s customary outbursts. Only this time it was not forthcoming. We finished grouping the flyers first and it was while doing the last of the name tags that she voiced her observations regarding the behavior of the younger generation and their parents in the present high-tech age. It served as food for thought during my less busy moments. Her usual emphatic delivery of opinions, I would have dismissed with a tolerant inward smile. This time her tone was subdued and the words were slow in coming as if for once she was treading uncertain ground. As her own children were all married and well-settled there was nothing personal or malicious in her opinions which made her observations all the more worthy of reflection.
According to her many of her friends were lamenting the lack of concern on the part of their daughters-in-law in the matter of looking after their husbands and children let alone their in-laws. What grieved the mothers-in-law the most was the indifference of their sons. They for the most part didn’t see anything untoward in the behavior of their wives and expected their parents to accept their spouses as they were. Here Gracy granted that there could be some truth in what the mothers-in-law said although she couldn’t suggest any worthwhile solution to the problem. She added with a twinkle in her eyes that perhaps the era of the powerful mother-in-law had gone with the dodo. 
Then she continued in serious tones ‘But Sarakutty, the emergence of the ‘current brood of uncaring and self-centered daughters-in-law’ as they say, poses a serious threat to the harmony within the family. Maybe there are some contributing factors such as the girls securing highly paid jobs as soon as they finish their technical studies and the effort they have to put in for keeping their jobs etc. which make them behave the way they do. Yet that is no justification for the utter ‘don’t care’ attitude they show in the affairs of their immediate family as many of my friends testify. Even though the challenges today’s young people face on a daily basis are many indeed, they will certainly be blessed for being mindful of their filial obligations. And the parents for their part would do well to get out of the mould of the previous generation by curbing their instinct for interfering in their children’s lives unnecessarily. Let the parents also try to pursue some hobbies or interests of their own which will divest their focus off their offspring. Perhaps, Sarakutty, the problem of ‘generation gap’ could be the real villain in the ‘in-laws’ relations.’
 Gracy must have gauged a ‘How’ from my facial expression for she presently said ‘Let me elaborate on my point dear’
Taking a deep breath, she began, ‘Let me tell you an instance from my own experience. In the early days of our married life we had stayed with my in-laws for a few months. My husband had gone backto his workplace and had been saving money for us to set up our separate house (establishment) there. During weekends, he used to come home, which was situated in an interior village with no scope for any outdoor activity. In those days the whole area was covered with paddy fields. I being a ‘Nature Person’ could be most happy going for a walk through them. And we did go for two evenings which I enjoyed heartily. But on the third day my mother-in-law told me that going for a walk through paddy fields was an unheard thing in those parts. Though I took her observation in the right sense, it nevertheless saddened me a little.’
‘Now Sarakutty, what I am trying to convey is that if I suggest to my son and daughter-in-law to go for a walk in the park or go to the seaside, they may not relish it at all but instead be wanting to meet their friends and have a jolly good time with them.
‘Sarakutty, in my opinion, if the seniors could get round the age old refrain ‘In our times…’ with sincere determination and focus on meeting the youngsters half way, many of the problems could be smoothed out to everybody’s advantage’
‘I know Sarakutty, mine was a lengthy monologue, but you see, these issues have been on my mind for some time now clamoring for an outburst. I am sorry if I bored you to death but I had to voice my thoughts to someone and what better ears than your patient ones? Well, we are done. Thank you dear.’
Gracy declined my offer for tea and cake as she was really pressed for time and was barely out of the gate when the telephone rang. Could it be Avarachan to say that he would be late? It was Alex asking for Avarachan. When I told him that he hadn’t returned yet, Alex hastily replied ‘That is fine, Saraunty. I just wanted to tell you that we have won the case.’
‘Thanks be to the Lord! What wonderful news Alex!’ I couldn’t contain my elation at the news.
 ‘Yes, Saraunty, God Almighty has been extremely kind to us even though I am quite sure that I don’t deserve a hundredth part of it. As for you people there, I don’t know how to convey my heartfelt gratitude to you, Avarachayan and especially Johnny. When I say that the three of you deserve one another, that sort of sums up my feelings. Now I can understand why Sally holds her Jocha in such high esteem. May God bless him! I will call in an hour’s time - do you think both Avarachayan and Johnny will be in by then? I tried Avarachayan’s mobile but that seemed to be switched off.’
It could have been just five minutes or half an hour later that the front door was pushed open and Avarachan came in. ‘Oh Aacha,’ I ran up to him, caught him in an embrace and said  ‘I am so happy, so happy Aacha.’ 
‘I am glad to hear that, now tell me what happened girl’ he said. 
‘Alex won the case, he called to tell us. He will be calling again later, he said.’
His face beamed with happiness. He proudly walked purposefully to the telephone stand. 
‘Please wait Aacha, let Jo also come home. I am sure Alex would want to talk to him also.’ I called out to him.
Anyway just as he was about to pick up the receiver the phone rang. It was Achayan calling to convey the glad news. As the brothers were happily engaged in their conversation I retreated to the kitchen for making tea for Avarachan and Jo as he could be expected anytime now. As a matter of fact, Jo had already come in and was asking me with a puzzled expression on his face “Amma, what is going on? Unki is excited over something - he hasn’t won a lottery or something, has he?’
At this all my excitement burst out in a loud peal of laughter and I said ‘What do you think my son? Lottery? Oh no! Something a hundred times better though.’ Then I paused for effect and said ‘Drum roll please! Alex won his case.’
‘That is great news Amme’ he said putting his hand on my shoulders. ‘Thank God the nightmare is over.’
We went to the drawing room where Avarachan was just finishing his talk with Achayan. Seeing Jo he said, ‘Come on, my boy, let us call Alex right away.’ I knew it was no use telling Avarachan to wait until after drinking tea.
From Avarachan’s responses, I could gather that Alex was thanking him profusely. Then a short spell of seriously spoken ‘Yes of course’ and ‘that is to be expected ‘etc followed.
‘Oh yes, I will give it to Jo’ Avarachan said and called Jo.
‘Hello Alexcha I am so glad to hear the news. I expect the next step is to get things moving again on your construction front isn’t it?’
I was watching Jo’s face. A slight blush had crept up there which meant Alex must have been expressing his gratitude for Jo’s intervention.
‘That was nothing Alexchaya. I believe completely in Higher Powers so I credit Him for taking charge of clearing the muddle. Please convey my regards to Bindumama and Sally.’
Now Alex was saying something to which Jo replied ‘Yes sure, I shall call Subramony immediately and convey your thanks. Bye.’
Later while Avarachan and I were having our usual post supper dessert in the drawing room, I couldn’t help comment on the tremendous change in the attitude of Alex. All Avarachan responded was that it was only to be expected after the earth shattering experiences he had been going through for over a year.
‘What was Achayan telling you Aacha?’ I asked.
 ‘Achayan’s feeling is that it would take at least two years for Alex to come through.’
‘But Alex is such a brilliant architect isn’t he? So let us hope and pray he gets out of the rut at the earliest.’ 
‘Yes of course’ agreed Avarachan.
We were on the point of turning in when the phone rang. This time it was Sally dear declaring that she had always known that the verdict would be in the favor of her Appa. Before ending her call, she expressly asked me to tell Jo to convey her and Bindu’s gratitude to Subramony. 
‘Hey Thali, are no thanks due to your Jocha then?’
‘If I thank him, I am sure her will tell me to shut up.’ Sally said.
‘How is Bindu? Thank God the worst is over.’ I said.
‘You have said it, Saraunty. But it is going to be an uphill task for Appa to bring his business to its original state. I doubt whether even Amma knows the true state of Appa’s finances. How I wish I had two or three years working experience so that I could earn more and be a help to Appa.’ Sally said.
‘Oh dear! I almost forgot to tell you something - Jo has brought a chain set for you. You may remind me, when you come for Sunil’s wedding.’
‘Saraunty, what is it I am hearing! - Jocha buying gifts for girls - even if the girl happens to be me. Well, well, I am most curious to meet this new avatar.’ Sally quipped.
‘Hold on Thali, let me clarify a little bit here. As a matter of fact, it was seeing Subramony buying a chain set for his younger sister that had prompted him to buy one for you too.  After all, you are the only one that close to him’ I said.
‘Saraunty, I was only kidding you know. I am really disappointed that I won’t see him when we come for the wedding. Any way you can convey my thanks in advance. So long Saraunty.’
Sunil’s wedding turned out to be grand affair, with almost every one of the near relatives attending the ceremony. Every little detail was taken care of and I felt very proud when Nancy introduced me to some of her close contacts as her father’s very dear friend’s daughter. Sally and Bindu had come the previous day, and they paid a short visit in the evening. I was a little surprised to see Bindu accompanying Sally though I took care not to show it. Neither did we ask nor did Bindu volunteer any information regarding the present state of Alex’s construction business. I knew for that we would have to see Sally alone. To my delight, after the wedding, Sally travelled in our vehicle due to lack of space in Achayan’s car for the ‘kachakoduppu’ ceremony in Susymama’s place.
As she and Bindu were leaving the next morning, I decided to sit with her at the back and chat. Sally said that though Alex was working hard the tremendous drain in their finances was not something that could be rectified in the near future. ‘How I wish I could secure a high-paid job Saraunty’ she added with a sigh. ‘You know Saraunty here is wishful thinking. Wouldn’t it be wonderful if I could get a job with a huge, I mean huge as in humungus, sign-on bonus and then they can do a pay-cut for some years until my salary is in par with others with similar experience.’
When we reached home I gave her Jo’s chain set. On opening the case she exclaimed “Wow! What a beautiful set! Saraunty, tell Jocha that I will be wearing this for his wedding. I am always on the lookout for a nice and pretty girl for him you know.’ 
It was on the tip of my tongue to blurt out that his ideal choice was somebody like herself. But I checked myself in time.
‘It is time I went, Saraunty’ don’t forget to give Jocha my thanks for the lovely gift.’
That night as I lay in bed my mind was restless with the scenes of the wedding flashing across. The image of the happy bride and groom was the foremost one. A close second was Nancy’s contented face. ‘Dear God, please grant that our boy also find such happiness in his marriage.’ I prayed silently.
------ Chapter 12
It was around the middle of the next month that Jo announced that he was being sent to France again for further training, this time for a period of six months. His partner was a senior officer from their Bombay office. They were expected to France by the end of the month.
The days passed quickly and the day of his departure was upon us. Last time I had no other thought save my anxiety in his travel and stay abroad. But this time another worry kept nagging me and I decided to have it out with him. I knew next to nothing regarding the company he would have to keep out there work-wise or socially. I wanted to caution him on a mild note. It was easier said than done for I didn’t have a clue on how to go about it. I needn’t have worried, though, for the subject was opened by Jo himself just a few moments before we started for the airport. I was asking him whether he had taken all the necessary papers.
‘Yes, Amme’ he announced. Then with a mischievous grin on his face he said sotto voce ‘Amme, if you fancy a French girl for a daughter-in-law let me know while I am there, OK?‘
I knew he had expected me to laugh out, but as this fear was uppermost in my mind, I didn’t and told him in a serious tone, ‘No son, not a French girl. You just bear in mind the conversation we once had when you challenged me to find for you a girl like our Thali. Well, who knows by the time you return I may have found just the right girl for you.’ 
‘Ooh La la! Somebody is touchy! I was only teasing you Amme. Don’t worry.’
However after we returned home, I told Avarachan that it was about time we started looking for a suitable girl for Jo. Avarachan came up with a practical solution.
‘Why don’t we put in a matrimonial ad in the newspapers, Thara?’ he asked.
‘That is of course the accepted procedure these days Aacha. But I dread the explanations we will have to give over phone. How I wish we could find ‘Miss Right’ from among our acquaintances. But that is only wishful thinking I know.’
‘Then it is as good as accomplished, Thara, as you have a battalion of friends and acquaintances.’ 
Avarachan’s immediate response made me smile but I didn’t comment on it. His remark must have made an impact on my thought process because during the ensuing week I placed a number of phone calls to my ‘batallion of friends’. Everyone readily agreed to be on the lookout but none had a ready candidate to suggest. 
As the weeks passed into months my hopes of finding ‘Miss Right’ before Jo’s return began to diminish. I regretted my impulsive reminder to Jo regarding ‘somebody like Thali’ even though the original suggestion had been made by Jo himself. Now I had a hearty wish to tell him that his demand was most unrealistic. But I couldn’t do it. In my heart I knew what he wanted was somebody who would accept him as Sally did. ‘Oh God! Please help us’ I prayed earnestly.
Sally used to call us once or twice in a month conveying news about her job and Alex’s business. By now he had been able to restart the construction of his main project on a small scale. The luckiest part was that his former foreman was willing to come back. As a result Alex would be able to take up some well-paid architectural jobs for individuals and institutions as a sideline for bringing in direly needed money. So far so good we all felt.
The next time she phoned, the news became even better. A freshly passed-out Telugu architect wanted to work with Alex’s company for the purpose of gaining experience. The boy proved to be a genius, his ideas complementing those of Alex perfectly. Thus, according to Sally, Alex was now trying to obtain a lucrative overseas job for a couple of years. These developments had naturally cheered up Achayan and Alice Kochamma. 
Hardly a week had passed by when Achayan called Avarachan to convey that Alex was going to Dubai within two or three weeks on a two-year contract with a very famous international construction company. The remuneration offered was so good that Alex felt confident of tiding over the dire straits with ease. His efficient foreman and the young apprentice could hopefully manage the business well enough with Alex’s remote guidance from Dubai. Alex would be coming to say goodbye, Achayan also added.
As I had been expecting Sally called that very evening and said ‘Tharanunty, we just don’t know how to thank our Lord for his kindness. Appa can come home for three days every two months. Foreman Uncle and the new assistant are quite capable of managing our business with Appa’s direction. With video conferencing and social networks it is as good as him still being in Chennai. 
‘How is Bindu, Sally? Hope she is happy’ I said.
‘Sure, she is so happy that she already looks ten years younger’ Sally said.
Barely five minutes after Sally’s call, Jo called. I conveyed the happy news to him. ‘Wow! Just the right breakthrough Alex Uncle needed at the moment’ was his comment. 
‘By the way,  Amme. There is a chance that we may be able to return two weeks earlier that is towards the middle of next month.’
‘Why, that is peachy Mone.’ I told him.
But as soon as I put the receiver back in its cradle, my worry over finding ‘Miss Right’ surfaced threatening to engulf me in depression. There was hardly thirty days to go before his arrival. Perhaps Avarachan’s suggestion of putting an ad wouldn’t be all that bad, I mused. And I told him just that when he returned. 
He was all enthusiasm and said ‘Thara, you write up a nice ad, we can arrange it to be published next Sunday itself, so we will get time to go through all the responses before Jo returns.‘
‘Oh! Aacha, how I wish I could muster up a tenth of your optimism.’
‘Hey, girl, who do you think our boy is? Girls’ parents would be queuing here, you mark my words.’ Avarachan asserted with gusto. To this I had no option but to laugh out which miraculously eased my tension.
However all through the morning hours part of my mind was unconsciously framing a suitable ad, while another part was altogether shying away from the attempt. As a result of these conflicting mental forces, by the time Avarachan came home for lunch I had developed a dull headache which kept me mum for the most part.
Avarachan had left for work after lunch. For inspiration I took the previous two weeks ‘Matrimonial’ pages and went to my side veranda. Then I resolutely began “Parents invite proposals for their son” and got stuck there.
‘Oh God! Help me please’ I prayed silently. Just then I heard the gate creaking and in came Anila with her customary exuberance. ‘Thank God you were not taking a nap as I feared. You see, I had come this way on an official errand. I have only a few minutes to spare but did not want to let go of the chance to say a quick ‘Hi’ to you Saraunty.’
Anila is a young friend of mine. She is nearly forty years and a spinster working as a clerk in the city Corporation Office. The main reason ascribed for her spinster status is the loss of sight in one eye. Added to that in most people’s opinion she is a shade too dark. But both these aspects have not diminished her innate jovial nature one bit. As her parents are no more she is living with her eldest brother and wife who have no children. All these years, they have been faithfully scouting for a suitable match for Anila but to no avail. She is a self-styled ‘life observer’ by which she means an expert in analyzing people’s character by observing their behavior and attitudes. 
Years before I had come into contact with her during our Sunday school teaching days.  Nobody could remain dull and drab in her company even if they wanted to. Most people used to wonder how the girl could be so carefree and lively despite her handicap.
‘Welcome dear, come in,’ I greeted her happily. She had already plopped into the opposite chair with an expression on her face which was all too familiar. She took in the magpie robins bustling about the Ceylon jasmine flowers and pointing to my dress and the colorless matrimonial pages I had laid out in full measure around me smilingly said ‘Monochrome all around I see.’ 
Happily putting aside the sorry sheet of paper I prompted her ‘Out with the latest and greatest my dear, I am all ears. I was trying to compose a matrimonial ad for our boy - I am so thankful for your wonderful interlude.’  
Anila laughed and said ‘There is no ‘latest or greatest’. Now that you are ready to stride in the matrimonial world Saraunty, let me open your eyes about the present day daughter-in-law.’
‘The old concept of the docile daughter-in-law is definitely a thing of the past. Today almost all the girls you meet are highly paid professionals who earns as much as or even more than their husbands. Somehow the parents (mostly mothers most of who were not earning members) feel that their daughters need not be all that submissive to either their husbands or in-laws. To me, equal footing sounds better though. In case a clash of ideas arises between the husband and wife, the girl in question is sure of her parental support. Thus in no time, a tiny rift is blown out of all proportions landing the concerned families in serious trouble. So watch out Saraunty.’ 
‘Hey Anila, having made such an in-depth analysis you may as well suggest some remedial measure for us poor prospective mothers-in-law for whom the tides have turned‘ I countered with a laugh. 
‘For that, you will have to wait till my next descent’ she said with a mischievous grin and left.
After Anila left, I just sat there musing over her words, which had disturbed my mental tranquility more than I cared to admit. Up till then, the possibility of a clash of personalities between us and our future daughter-in-law had never crossed my mind. To shake off the mild depression that was threatening to engulf me, I decided to make some sweet snack for tea and got up. The choice was between ‘aval’ and ‘kozhukatta’ and ‘kozhukatta’ won hands down solely because it was more involved. But because I wasn’t focused I messed up on the quantity and soon had enough ‘kozhukattas’ to feed a small army.
While we were having our tea, I had half a mind to tell Avarachan about Anila’s insight. But then Achayan called and told us that Alex was coming over next day to say good bye. I was relieved to hear the news on two counts. For one, it took my mind of all the unpleasant conjectures. Secondly his visit was something to look forward to because we will be getting first-hand information about Sally and her job. The very thought mellowed my troubled heart.
Just before we retired, there was a call from Jo. Their work was almost finished and so they would probably be returning within a fortnight. As per their flight schedule he had a few hours halt at Chennai.
As soon as the call was over, Avarachan turned towards me and asked if I had written up the matrimonial ad. I didn’t know what answer to give him, so I said the first thing that came to my mind. ‘I will get it ready after Alex’s visit tomorrow. ‘ 
‘What has Alex’s visit got to do with it girl?’ Avarachan demanded with irritation. ‘The kid will be here before you know it and then what will we do? You better get it ready soon Sara.’
I couldn’t tell him about the mental block I had in the matter. As I was falling into sleep a thought shot through my mind  that perhaps the ‘life-observer Anila’ would be able to give me some helpful suggestions in the matter and decided to call her up soon after Avarachan left for work.
----- Chapter 13 ----------
But in the morning nothing quite worked out to my planning. For one it was raining cats and dogs when I awoke and went to kitchen for making breakfast. We had barely finished eating when the phone rang and to our surprise, it was Alex telling us that he had arrived at Achayan’s by an early morning flight and would be leaving soon after lunch. He wanted to know whether it would inconvenience Avarachan if he came right away for a visit. 
Avarachan happily assured him that he had enough clout that it didn’t matter at all if he turned up two or three hours late at his workplace that day and invited him to come over pronto. As the clang of the doorbell synchronized with the sound of the plates and cups hastily dumped into the sink I didn’t see Alex coming in.
Hearing Avarachan’s hearty ‘Hey Sara, see who is here?’ I quickly washed my hands and went to greet him. I had hardly crossed the dining room when Alex came forward and held my damp hands in a warm clasp saying ‘How are you Sarakochamme?’ I was so surprised - nay dazed - by his unexpected behavior that I just stared at his face dumbfounded. However I managed to regain my poise before Avarachan or Alex sensed my shock and followed them into the drawing room.
Avarachan was all agog to hear about the present state of Alex’s construction business. Again to my wonder, Alex was quite willing to describe in detail not only the present but also his future plans for expanding his business. 
As the men were engrossed in their conversation, I slowly got up to get a plate of banana chips for them to munch on. No sooner had I reached the door than Alex called out ‘No Saraunty, please don’t get anything to eat - I have had a heavy breakfast. ‘
‘Just a plate of chips, Alex’ and went up to the cupboard.
I did take out the tin and the plate but then sat down on my barstool in the kitchen in bemusement.  I couldn’t quite take in the marked transformation that had come over Alex. The old Alex, polite but cool and detached, I could easily take in my stride. But this new version bewildered me though I couldn’t pinpoint a concrete reason for it. A rather feeble explanation could be the extreme gratitude he felt towards us for the help rendered by Jo. But it couldn’t certainly be termed out of the ordinary because after all he was our own nephew. No, I decided, it was something that went deeper something beyond my comprehension. The cessation of conversation from the living room brought me out of my reverie.  While I was daydreaming Avarachan, who was never one for small talk, had taken Alex had gone through the side veranda and were in the garden overlooking the 30 cents. Seeing me they came back and we settled in the cane chairs there. I placed the plate of chips and a plate of ‘kozhukatta’ before the menfolk. It seemed they were in a way waiting for my entry.
Alex’s hand hovered over the chips but then settled on a ‘kozhukatta’ instead. He turned towards me smiling ‘When is our Johnny coming back?’
‘Within a fortnight,’ I replied.
‘It is really a pity that I won’t be meeting him’ said Alex with genuine regret. ‘In fact I have only a vague memory of his appearance although he frequently figures in Sally’s babblings.’
At the mention of her name I eagerly asked, ‘How is Sally, Alex? We haven’t seen her since she turned a working girl.’
‘Sure, she is very serious about her job and all telling us that she won’t be marrying till she is thirty at least.’
‘Don’t take her at her word, Alex, all young girls say the same thing but let a suitable guy appear, all their resolutions are gone with the wind ‘ said Avarachan laughing heartily.
‘But your views on the subject are some twenty years behind, Aacha’ I said fortified with newfound wisdom, courtesy of my friends. ‘Gone are those days - these days, young professional girls tend to stick to their priorities no matter what their parents may wish.’
‘Sarachamma has a point there’ agreed Alex. Then he added ‘To be frank, it worries me a little that I will be out of scene at this juncture. I would have preferred to see her at least engaged to an eligible boy of our choice. But you see, we are at a present not in a position to contract an alliance for her - well, at least for the coming two years.’
‘That needn’t worry you Alex’ I told him consolingly ‘She will only be twenty five or so by then.’
‘Yes, that is true Sarachamme,’ agreed Alex. ‘May God grant that she stays clear of any unwelcome attachment’ Alex said.
I nodded in agreement.
‘By the way, how old is Johnny, Sarachamme?’
‘He will be turning twenty seven within a couple of months. As a matter of fact, we are seriously thinking of finding a nice girl for him, aren’t we Sara?’ Avarachan put in with a tinge of pride.
‘Why, in that case, I too have a candidate to propose’ Alex said with seeming nonchalance.
‘Of course we will give her first preference, Alex. It is really Jo’s decision though. Is she a relation or something?’ Avarachan asked enthusiastically.
But Alex didn’t reply immediately. For my part, I didn’t at all share Avarachan’s enthusiasm simply because I felt that Alex’s people and we had little in common. However, the fact that he thought our Jo worthy for one of his relation was a pleasing one. Accordingly I had a mild smile plastered on my face as a ready response to Alex. I knew, Avarachan’s eyes were fixed on Alex in anticipation but Alex turned towards me and said simply ‘I shall consider myself blessed if you two would consider Sally also.’
Time stood still. The half-smile on my face froze. I felt numb all over. I could vaguely feel Avarachan pressing his hands on my cheeks and Alex patting my arms. Avarachan’s persistent ‘Relax Thara’ brought me back to the present.
Alex was holding my hands, anxiously watching my face, which as they later told me had gone deathly pale. 
I felt such a fool to have created a scene but God knew I couldn’t help it.
‘Please Alex, I am so sorry,’ I began but he interrupted me still holding my hand ‘I am extremely sorry if I spoke out of turn. You please forget I made such a suggestion.’
‘You don’t understand Alex’ I said hastily. ‘It is not because the proposal is objectionable in any technical sense but you see, the possibility of such an alliance had never crossed our minds mainly  because the children have known each other from childhood on and are as close as any brother and sister could be. So your suggestion shocked me, I am afraid.’
‘Well Alex,’ Avarachan said ‘what Sara said is the actual state of affairs. But I would like to know why you made the proposal especially because I am dead sure that Achayan and Kochamma would see the alliance as a blot on their prestige.’ 
I felt relieved to hear Avarachan speak out thus. Alex took his time to reply. But when he did, the words came out in an even flow underlining the sincerity behind them.
He began ‘I am sure both of you will agree that the Alex you knew prior to my problems wouldn’t have found the time to pay you a relaxed visit even. I was too busy building up my construction company and my social contacts centered exclusively on the so called ‘high society’. 
‘Perhaps my family background may also have had a hand in shaping my social interactions. You know my people were a set of successful businessmen.’ 
‘Now looking back, I realize that my disaster years had a special purpose even though it was sheer hell at that time. That is not to say that I had bitter experiences from my former friends and that is what brought about my inner transformation. I don’t know if I am making myself clear, but one thing I am absolutely certain is that my darkroom experience was good for me in the sense that God used it to liberate my soul from the shackles of ego. ‘ 
He stopped and sat back in the not-so-comfortable cane chair and stared into the garden absent-mindedly. Following his eyes I noticed sub-consciously that my ‘uppan’ had obligingly positioned itself as his target. In spite of the moment I couldn’t but admire the big bird’s ruby-red eyes.
‘You see Alex, during that time Sally also had told me something to the same effect which had surprised me’ I said mainly to break the silence. 
‘Oh! Did she? Bless her heart! You see I want you to know that when I made the suggestion regarding Johnny I was actually being selfish, because I wanted to get the finest boy and his priceless parents for my girl. So if you two have no objection and the children are willing, shall we shake hands on the proposal? Your apprehension as regards Daddy and Mummy are quite immaterial, you know. In fact, I haven’t even told Bindu about this. So will you please think it over and let me know your decision?
‘Come on Alex, how can we have any objection in the matter? She has always been our own daughter. But I think getting Johnny’s opinion could be a rather delicate issue. Anyway we will inform you within a couple of months. There is no hurry, is there?’ Avarachan asked.
‘No hurry at all’ asserted Alex.  ‘As a matter of fact I need at least one year to make our company run smooth. So you are free to consider any other suitable proposals that may come in the meantime,’ Alex said. 
‘Anyway I shall keep in touch with you over phone, OK?’ he added as an afterthought. He looked at his watch and got up to leave. Taking my hands in a firm clasp and turning towards Avarachan he said ‘Good bye’. We followed him to the living room and watched him leave.
I sank into the settee drained of all feelings. I could feel Avarachan sitting beside me putting his hand over my shoulder. Thankfully, he too was lost for words. How long we thus sat, I had no idea, could be, five minutes or fifteen.
‘It is time I left for office, Thara - we will get over the shock my dear,’ he said consolingly.
‘Yes, I know that Aacha.’
‘Hey put on your smile girl - it is not the end of the world you know’. 
I was thankful that he was back at his usual brisk self.
‘I shall be a little late to return’ he called out while closing the gate.


How long I sat there motionless, I had no idea until the postman knocked at the gate for delivering a registered letter. I was glad for his intrusion. As it was well past lunch time I made do with the breakfast leftovers and then got ready to go and see Elia Kochamma.
Whatever everyone else might say, this was something beyond my comprehension. I felt so out of my depth that I had to talk it over with somebody who could empathize with me. The very thought of her calm reassuring demeanor pacified me somewhat. I decided to make the visit snappy for I wanted to return before Avarachan reached home. 
But my hurry proved unnecessary as her son Aby called to enquire whether I would be at home around five in the evening.
‘Oh course, I shall be home. Are you coming alone or with Elia Kochamma?’ I asked excitedly.
‘I am taking Amma to see her eye doctor for changing glasses’ Aby explained. ‘The one at your junction.’
I couldn’t believe the lucky turn of events. My spirits immediately rose up. Elia Kochamma always liked my banana roast. I decided to make some for all the little kids that hung out at her place as well. As I was making the snack my mind was busy arranging the anxieties and fears I intended to discuss with her. 
The doctor’s appointment was over earlier than expected and hence they arrived at half past four. Surely my guardian angels were surely working overtime! I received Elia Kochamma with an embrace. I didn’t want to lose time exchanging usual pleasantries. I invited them to have tea and snacks during which time I told them about my intended visit. I told Aby that I had an important matter to discuss with Elia Kochamma and asked to be excused. He happily agreed to watch some sports item on the TV. I took Elia Kochamma to the side veranda and told her the whole story beginning with Alex’s financial problems, Jo’s part in solving them, right up to Alex’s morning visit and the totally unexpected proposal he made from the very chair I was sitting.
‘Elia Kochamme, my mind is so confused. I simply can’t think straight and view things in the right perspective’ I said.
‘When confused, dear, try to face your worries one at a time. Divide and conquer works wonders.’
‘Elia Kochamme I am ready to do whatever you suggest as long as some ray of light would fall on this utter chaos and confusion.’
‘Let us consider things backwards, Sarakutty. That is, tell me have you any objections in Jo marrying Sally?’
I couldn’t help the blush that crept up my face. I felt a bit shy and unconsciously avoided eye contact with Elia Kochamma while I replied.
‘If it materializes Elia Kochamme, we will be getting our own princess to cherish.’
‘That part is settled. Now what do you think Johnny’s reaction would be?’
‘I can’t answer that! But I do know that he likes her a lot in a brotherly fashion. In fact just before he went abroad he had challenged me in a semi joking manner to find him a girl like Sally to marry.’
‘From that remark, I think we can make the surmise that he won’t be averse to Alex’s proposal. We can’t be sure about his feelings unless we ask him directly.’ Elia Kochamma said thoughtfully.
‘Elia Kochamme, it is a very delicate situation, and I don’t think I can summon up the courage to ask him.’
‘Then let Avarachan ask him Sarakutty’, Elia Kochamma replied simply.
Visualizing Avarachan asking Jo’s opinion made for such a funny mental picture that I laughed out helplessly.
‘If that suggestion is not practical, you think up some tactful way my dear’ Elia Kochamma said.
‘Then there is Sally herself. I have no notion as to her response. To her Jo has always been an elder brother or cousin whom she adores blatantly. The suggestion may be offensive to her I am afraid’ I said.
‘You may be wrong there Sarakutty. If she adores him a slight shift in the affection may not be all that difficult you know. Still as in Jo’s case, it has to be ascertained. What else are your worries?’ asked Elia Kochamma.
‘Elia Kochamme, we are now left with the elephant in the room. You know Achayan and Alice Kochamma. Avarachan and I are pretty sure they will not find the alliance palatable. Alex says that their views need not be considered at all. He being the son-in-law can be assertive, but Avarachan being their much younger brother had better stay clear of any controversial issues. Hence, even if the children are willing, we are in a predicament.’
Elia Kochamma did not immediately reply. She was evidently taking stock of the situation. Then with the hint of a sigh she said slowly ‘All things considered it will be best if you wait for a few months without telling anyone. Anyway Alex needs one year’s time. In the meantime try to gauge the children’s attitudes. You see Sarakutty, I have found that in most instances a little patience will bring in rich dividends. Given time most tricky situations have a tendency to get unraveled. So play the waiting game for the time being. That is my considered opinion.’
‘May your predictions come true,’ I said fervently
‘It is getting late dear, shall we take our leave?’ she gently asked. 
In reply, I kissed her cheeks and handed over to her the banana roast collection and led her back to the drawing room.
After they left, I made a fresh cup of tea and drank it slowly all the while trying to see the situation in a detached frame of mind. After all, as Elia Kochamma pointed out there was no urgency in the matter. 
A small voice within me whispered ‘Who knows even Alex may retract his proposal and render all this confusion needless.’
Even though the thought gave me no particular comfort, it had the effect of bringing my mental equilibrium back to near normalcy. Avarachan’s ‘Thara, I am glad to see you are composed’ in the evening confirmed it.
‘Aacha it is really thanks to my dear Elia Kochamma’s unexpected visit.’ I proceeded to give him a brief update of her visit.
‘Sure, sure she is such a wise old lady’ agreed Avarachan.
‘But then Thara,’ he continued, ‘let us keep Alex’s proposal a secret. Whatever Alex might say, as I already told him, it is not going to gladden the hearts of Achayan and Kochamma. Moreover we have no idea how the children may react or even Bindu for that matter. So let us keep mum and simply be onlookers.
‘Yes that will be best’ I agreed
‘And Aacha,’ I asked. ‘What about the matrimonial ad? Shall we shelve the idea for the time being?’
‘Yes, we will wait and see how things develop’ he said.
Then Avarachan came up to me and putting his hands on my shoulders said with his boyish grin ‘What a bombshell it was, eh, Thara!’
I nodded in agreement. 
‘And how we wish it would come to pass!’ he said and took me in his arms.
Again I nodded.	



The following days went past too swiftly or so it seemed to me. I had desperately wanted to possess a clear perspective of the situation before Jo’s arrival. But my mind somehow shied from delving into the matter with the result that when the day dawned I was nowhere close to the calm and collected mind frame than I had hoped to be in. But I couldn’t find solace by talking it out with Avarachan because; to him the whole issue had no present relevance and hence could be easily ignored. As for me, even Elia Kochamma’s wise counsel didn’t do much to soothe my mental agitation. I asked Avarachan, to go to the airport alone for receiving Jo on the pretext that I needed time to finish cooking. To my relief, he didn’t make any fuss but happily went off.
I went to the dining room, sat up by the table with the sole intent of working out a strategy for tackling the issue. I knew it was ridiculous to be in such a flutter whenever I thought about Alex’s proposal. ‘Oh God, please help me’ I sighed. Suddenly a thought flashed across my mind as if somebody were whispering ‘Perhaps Alex may not have meant it as a serious proposal but just as an expression for the sincere appreciation he felt towards our boy.’
‘Thank God!’ I almost jumped up in a surge of relief, feeling the nervous tension ebbing away. Then I heard the car coming in.
I ran to the front and was engulfed in Jo’s warm embrace “Amme, Why didn’t you come to the airport? Unki said something about you being under the weather. Are you alright?’
‘Oh yes, I am quite alright Mone, ‘I said.
Then I eyed him critically and said ‘You have put on a wee bit weight Jo and it sure suits you. The numerous croissants are starting to show up! Now go freshen up and let us have our breakfast. I am sure you must be famished.’
It was while we were having breakfast that Jo said suddenly ‘Unki told me that Alex uncle has left for Dubai and that our Thali has become a busy professional managing her job and supervising her father’s business at the same time. How is she nowadays Amme? Come to think of it I haven’t seen the girl since I went to France the first time.’
My heart skipped a beat. I couldn’t help it.
It was Avarachnan who replied ‘Then it is high time you met her, son. Such a lovable kid isn’t she Thara?’
‘Of course, she has always been our pet’ Jo commented sipping his tea. 
Thankfully neither Avarachan nor Jo had noticed my silence.
‘Amme I am going to rest for some time. I have a meeting with my boss at 3 PM.
‘Yes, you try to sleep for some time, son’ advised Avarachan and left for office.
While preparing the lunch, I chided myself for being ultra-sensitive on hearing Jo’s mentioning Sally’s name. ‘What a blessed temperament Aacha has!‘ I thought for the umpteenth time.
After dinner, Jo showed us some photos of the places he had visited. We also saw the officer who had gone with him. He looked in his fifties. Jo was sitting with his laptop between us in the settee. ‘He looks a nice man.’ I said. 
With a merry laughter, Jo told us ‘Yes he is a nice man indeed.’ Then with a twinkle in his eyes he added ‘But you see, sometimes I got the impression that he had some designs on me.’
‘What designs?’ my tone was sharper than I intended.
‘Gosh Amma! Don’t get all worked up. I only wanted to regale you with his subtle manner of talking about his doctor daughter doing her PG in an Assam Medical College. Maybe my being half-Mizo had something to do with it.’
‘Wait a minute! You are a Kerala boy who will marry a Malayalee girl. Hmmm -half Mizo, my foot’ Avarachan declared emphatically.
Jo looked at Avarachan and then at me and said softly ‘Oh dear! What is the matter with you two?’
When neither of us replied he added jokingly ‘From the manner you talk, I have a suspicion that you have some girl in mind.’
‘Maybe we do, maybe we don’t. We are on the lookout you know’ replied Avarachan grandly with an air of self-assurance.
Jo turned towards me to ask something it seemed. But he didn’t and instead got up ‘I think I’ll better turn in, Goodnight’, he said. 
Soon after we also switched off the lights and went to bed. For once Avarachan didn’t fall into sleep immediately.
‘Well, Thara, our boy has become quite handsome and it is time that we find a girl for him. Honestly I can’t decide what we are to do about Alex’s proposal.
I didn’t say anything.
‘Hey, you say something girl.’ Avarachan insisted.
Despite the circumstances I was tickled to find Avarachan in some mental confusion. But I couldn’t say that because the poor fellow was trying to grapple with something beyond his comprehension. 
‘Aacha, let us say our prayers and go to bed. Who knows perhaps the solution we hope for may be just around the corner.’ I said more to pacify him than out of conviction. Anyway it had the desired effect, soon after prayers Avarachan turned on his side with an audible sigh and fell into deep slumber. 



Next day after Avarachan and Jo went to their offices I stopped by the bank for renewing a fixed deposit. I was surprised to see Anila at the cash counter counting out some bundles of notes. She put the money in her bag and turned to go. I tapped her shoulder and said ‘Wait for me, Anila, my business won’t take long.’
Oh, it is you Saraunty’ she said with something like relief. ‘I will be in that corner. You take your time I am in no hurry.’
When I came back, Anila stood up and said diffidently. ‘Can you spare me half an hour Saraunty? I want to discuss something with you. In fact I was going to call for an appointment after I was done here.’
‘Of course my dear, let us go and sit on the low wall under that shady tree’ I said brightly and led the way. 
‘Saraunty, do you mind if we head to your place? I crave the comfort of your garden today.’
The little garden was devoid of any special as it was still working its way out of the monsoon onslaught. However the ‘konna’ tree at the rear was in full bloom with its serene yellow clusters. A ‘konna’ is in full bloom is indeed a magnificent sight to behold. I remember not too long ago, this state tree of ours bloomed only from March to May. One silver lining of global warming and El Nino is that the ‘konna’ lost its sense of season. It now awakens at all odd times delighting us all. I jokingly remarked to Anila that the ‘konna’ must have given a complex to the garden that it took a break.
Anila took hold of my hand and said ‘My Achachan (meaning her brother) is not doing well, there is something wrong with his abdomen. Day after tomorrow he is getting admitted to hospital to undergo an urgent surgery. And as you know, Ammamma (his wife) has not been keeping good health for a long time. I am so worried Saraunty.’
Her voice broke and she sobbed silently. I put my left arm around her shoulders and said ‘Don’t be worried and upset Anila, he won’t be having any serious problem as you fear, my dear.
‘How I wish it were so Saraunty’ she said and then added ‘but during the past few months he has lost so much weight and that is the most worrying aspect.’
I didn’t know how to console her. ‘Let us pray to God, dear, there is nothing he can’t do for sure.’
Anila nodded in agreement and then said ‘There is something else I wanted to go over with you, Saraunty. About six months ago a new section officer has been posted to our office. He looks around fifty years, well give or take a few and is a bachelor. Although he doesn’t mingle much with the staff most people find him a likable chap. As I didn’t come directly under his control, I have hardly ever talked to him. Then last month there was a send-off party arranged in the canteen hall. We were listening to the funny speech of our colleague Ravi who has a penchant for making even a somber occasion into a hilarious one. Nowadays retirement from service seldom makes anyone tearful as it used to in the bygone days, you know. Long story short, I hadn’t realized that the chair to my left side had been occupied by James Sir. Hence his ‘Anila may I speak to you?’ startled me. ‘Yes Sir,’ I said automatically and waited.
‘Tomorrow, that is Sunday, my uncle is coming this way and would like to visit your brother who is a close friend of his. Please give me the directions to your house. We may come around 4:30 in the evening. OK?’ he asked in quiet tones.
‘Of course Sir, our house is the last one on the first right side lane next to the St. Paul’s CSI Church’ I said slightly bewildered.
‘Thank you’ he said, then got up and moved away as silently as he had come. As I walked home from the office, I wondered if Achachan knew of his friend’s intended visit. Obviously he did because the first question he asked me was whether his friend’s nephew had contacted me for directions. From his expression it was clear that he was anticipating the visit with great pleasure. 
‘Achacha, if he is such a close friend, how come he doesn’t know where you live? Why did he have to take the roundabout route via me’ I wanted to know.
‘Well, during our bachelor days we were living in the same lodge, then he went abroad seeking job and we lost touch till recently when I met by chance a common friend who gave me his phone number.’
I did not feel like probing further and was about to go to my room when Achachan asked with some hesitation ‘Are you acquainted with his nephew Anila?’
‘We are on nodding terms, Achacha’ I said.
I was a little surprised to see that even Ammama was eagerly awaiting their visit. ‘These days there is not much news to talk about for the poor darlings’ I thought to myself. 
Still when the time was getting on to four, it amused me to note that both Achachan and Ammama were dressed neatly as if the visit held some particular significance for them. Ammamma even asked me to wear the light blue saree which she had a special liking for. I humored her for she rarely made demands. Then, it was three neatly dressed us who waited for Achachan’s friend.
As the clock struck the half hour, the gate creaked and there they were, walking the short distance up to the verandah. Achachan went forward clasped his friend’s hands and then gave his hand to James Sir, who courteously held it in both hands.
Ammama stood behind the settee in the drawing room, beaming a welcoming smile. I stood far back unsure of my role in the proceedings. 
‘Anila, come and meet my good old friend, Simon.’ To my annoyance, I felt suddenly shy. To cover it up, I walked briskly forward and took his extended hand.
‘Please take your seats’ Ammama gently said.
‘I have to meet a friend who will be waiting in front of the church’ said James Sir. Then he turned to his uncle and asked ‘Do you think you will be ready to return in half an hour.’ His uncle nodded and James Sir smiled at us and left.
As Ammama and I were busy in the kitchen, the friends were engrossed in their conversation. 
‘He is a nice looking chap. I quite like him’ Ammama said.
‘Oh yes, considering he is Achachan’s friend he is in good form’ I agreed.
‘Hey, I meant the young man.’
‘What young man? If you meant James Sir, he is not young he must be around fifty I think.’
‘No, not fifty, just turned forty seven, dear’ Ammama said.
‘How do you know when he turned what, Ammame?’ I couldn’t contain my surprise.
‘Well to me he looks young’ she replied lamely and turned the conversation by asking me to get the snacks and tea on a tray. I set aside the cup of tea meant for James Sir and took the tray to the front. I was about to go back when Achachan’s friend asked us to join them for a while. He was a pleasant man, easy to talk with. When James Sir returned, I went in to get his cup of tea. I politely asked him if he wanted it piping hot, he replied with a wide smile that he liked it just as it was. Saraunty, his reply was OK, but why the elders suddenly laughed, I was at a loss to understand.
I went back in, while Ammama stood at the door, listening and occasionally joining in their conversation. Presently they stood up to leave.
‘Anila, do come, they are leaving’ Achachan called out. They took their leave and Achachan went upto the gate to see them off. When he returned there was a white cover in his hand and a look of happy anticipation in his tired eyes.
All through our supper, I felt a suppressed excitement lurking in the behavior of both Achachan and Ammama. When I retired to my room and was reading Bible prior to going to bed, Ammama came in holding the white cover.
‘Anila dear, James asked Achachan to give you this.’ Ammama said and gave it to me. She had already left the room when I had cast a quick glance to see to whom it was addressed. It was addressed to ‘Ms. Anila Thomas’. I put it on the table and after reading the Bible took it up, but didn’t quite feel like opening it. I had a sudden premonition that the letter was personal not official. I put off the light and lied down, only to put it on after a while, because I knew Achachan and Ammama would be anxious to hear about the content. Well I read it Saraunty.’ 
Then she opened her handbag and gave me a folded sheet of paper. ‘Here is his letter, Saraunty, I want you to please read it and advise me what to do.’
‘But Anila, are you sure, that I can read it?’ I asked.
‘Oh! Yes. I do want you to read it. Did I not tell that had I not met you at the Bank, I would have visited you - well it was for this very purpose’ she assured me. ‘And that is why I insisted on the garden too.’
Dear Anila,
I can visualize the wonder nay shock you may feel. Let me tell you at the very outset that I am not very good either at talking or writing. So I would rather put what is on my mind plainly on this piece of paper. The thing is I would like to know if you would kindly consider marrying me. I fervently hope this direct approach doesn’t shock you very much.
In this context, I think I ought to explain why I haven’t married yet. Now I am forty seven years old. I would have liked to marry and raise a family at the age generally considered proper for a guy. But my father died when I had just got my Bachelor’s degree. My elder sister had already been married and wasliving with her husband and children in Chennai. My mother’s family had a history of mental illness. She herself was not fully normal all the time. She was affected by mood swings but had never become violent. My father was most understanding and patiently took care of her all those years. After his death, it was my duty to look after her. My father’s death had sunk her into depression. I spent all my spare time attending to her needs. In the meanwhile I had secured my job. Fortunately we had a reliable elderly woman who took up the job of nursemaid cum cook. Whenever I was transferred to some other office I asked for a daily commutable place. 
Thus the years went by until two years ago when after a short illness my mother passed away. By then I had got accustomed to my bachelor status. Another contributing factor was that my elder nephew had also suffered from a bout of mental problem in his teenage years though it could be successfully treated. He is now quite all right and working as an efficient mechanical engineer in a reputable firm in Chennai. Yet the fact that mother’s illness had passed on to the third generation after bypassing my sister and I served as a deterrent to any idea of marriage I might have cherished. 
Now I have been transferred to this office and got the chance to have a smiling acquaintance with you. You being you and I being all too conscious of my family history are in no circumstance conducive to a marriage proposal. Nothing would have materialized but for the intervention of my uncle and your brother. Though they might not have said anything to you, it was at their insistence that I came there with my uncle. 
Now Anila the ball is in your court, as they say. You please consider my proposal from all angles and come to a decision. Let not the wishes of your brother and sister-in-law influence you, although I will consider myself blessed if you are agreeable.
Yours sincerely
James.
‘What a straightforward chap, Anila!’ I said from the bottom of my heart. ‘Have you come to a decision dear?’ I asked
‘I couldn’t sleep after reading this Saraunty. Yesterday I didn’t go to office. Today as you see, I have to get things ready for Achachan’s surgery.’
‘But Anila, the poor guy would be waiting for your response.’
Suddenly her eyes filled and she said ‘I can’t think straight. It is not just him - even though I know for sure my Achachan and Ammamma’s wishes. The poor darlings are sort of holding their breath.’
‘What is holding you back dear? Is it the illness running in his family? Or is it the person himself? How is he to look at?
She didn’t reply immediately. Then she said slowly ‘No Saraunty, the illness part does not affect me at all. Anyone could be affected with any disease anytime. As for his personality, he is good looking with pleasing manners, though rather quiet. I think what holds me back as you put it, Saraunty is the part that I am no match for him looks-wise’ she replied.
Hearing this I burst out laughing. ‘Oh come on, Anila, now all you want is a reassurance from him that he finds you attractive’ I teased her.
As I had expected a shy smile crept up her face and she said ‘I am so thankful that I had the sense to touch base with you Saraunty. Shall I tell Ammamma to let him know that I have no objection?’
‘Yes, you may do that. But still remember that the decision should be entirely yours dear, as James has reminded you’ I said gently.
During the course of the next day’s routine jobs, Anila and her problems remained a muted background score in my mind with the result I didn’t dwell too much on our own problems concerning Alex’s proposal. I very much wanted to know how things would pan out for her. As I was cleaning the kitchen counter after supper, Anila called me. Jo was in a conference call and Avarachan was deeply engrossed in a football match on the TV. So I had the telephone nook all to myself. 
‘Saraunty, as soon as I returned from the Bank, I told Achachan and Ammama about my willingness to the proposal. To say they were overjoyed would be an understatement. Achachan lost no time to inform his friend who in turn told his nephew with the result that within hardly one hour James Sir himself called and thanked me though it should have been the other way round. My greatest satisfaction is seeing Achachan’s happiness. He is already making plans for a quick wedding as soon as he comes back after the surgery. We will be going to the hospital tomorrow afternoon. The surgery will be in 2-3 days.  So bye, Saraunty’ Anila said. Then she quickly added ‘Please remember us all in your prayers, Saraunty.’
‘Yes, I will certainly pray for you dear. When you get time remember to give me a call’ I told her.
That night, as I lay down on bed, my mind hovered on Anila’s brother’s surgery the next day. Then suddenly, a long forgotten conversation I once had with an elderly cousin of mine came to my mind. She was in the early seventies and was suffering from a terminal illness which was in an advanced stage. Her husband was a brilliant industrialist, holding key position in a prominent firm. Her children were all well-educated and well-settled. My cousin was a pleasant person to talk to and to have a nice time with. Even in her advanced stage of illness, her many friends and relatives who dropped in to visit her were amazed at the way she welcomed them, ready with a happy smile as if it were her visitors who needed cheering up.
 One day Avarachan had dropped me at her place on his way back to the office after lunch and would be coming to pick me up when he returned. So it was a leisurely visit, I had taken her a packet each of homemade ‘mavundas’ and ‘kuzhallappams’.
‘How tasty are these homemade things, Sarakutty’ she said biting on one crunchy ‘kuzhallappam. ‘Thank you my dear.’
We spent some time talking about our families. Her vivid description about the antics of her four year old grandson made me laugh out in genuine merriment. As she was in such high spirits, I refrained from asking about her health condition.
Then quite unexpectedly a cloud spread over her lovely face. She said slowly ‘Sarakutty, as you know I had led a fairly active social life while Achayan was alive and even after his death, I had no dearth of friends and relatives to keep company with’ she paused.
‘Yes Ammame, you are such a gregarious person full of pep even now’ I endorsed her statement sincerely.
Graciously nodding her head she continued ‘But now that I am passing through the last phase of my life, I do have a few regrets which I haven’t shared with anyone.’ 
She kept her gaze fixed on my eyes and began ‘You see, now I wish instead of being gregarious, witty and all, I had been truly concerned about the people who came into contact with me.’
She forestalled my vehement denial with a lifted hand and went on ‘No Sarakutty, believe me, I know what I am talking about. Now that I am bedridden, I have had plenty of time to ruminate over my past life. I won’t say that I was unsympathetic to other’s needs or problems in a superficial manner. But I was always reluctant to waste my precious time or energy or money for the sheer purpose of serving others. That is, my sympathy seldom got to down to the practical level of helping them out with possible financial or other necessary support or even giving them some moral support when needed.’
‘But then Ammame, most of us are wrapped in the affairs of our own little world’ I tried to philosophize.
‘No my dear, in fact now I have found out that only a few like me merit the label ‘self-centered’. When I look back I can recollect many occasions when I could have taken a little sacrifice and be of help to others especially my close relatives in their need.’
‘But you always were great fun to be with, Ammame’ I said consolingly.
‘That is just like the gloss on cheap clay pots my dear’ she was quick to respond.
Then she continued with a smile ‘Have I upset you with my somber revelations dear?’ Her smile broadened to a low-pitched laughter. ‘It may amaze you Sarakutty, how in my esteem people like you, my siblings and their spouses stand so tall.’
The faint sniffle belied the laughter in her voice. ‘Shall I tell you just an instance, my dear’ she asked. Her voice was weak and barely audible. ‘Last month, that is on Christmas Day I had a surprise visit from my brother and his wife Santha. They had brought along Santha’s masterpiece Biriyani which we ate together in great enjoyment. Can you believe, for making a sick sister happy, they hadn’t minded at all a tiresome two-hour journey by bus.’
I instinctively leaned forward and kissed on her cheek and murmured ‘Don’t feel sad Ammame, our good Lord would certainly grant you time and energy to atone for your omissions. In the meantime, you keep on praying for the welfare and happiness of all the dear ones and also for the world at large.’
Hearing my words her tired eyes sparkled and a teary smile was my reward.
When I straightened up, I was surprised to see that she had fallen asleep. The emotional strain might have exhausted her, I surmised. So I thought it better not to wait up for Avarachan and decided to take an autorickshaw to go home after informing him.




The last month passed too quickly and next week it was Jo’s 27th birthday. Yesterday when I mentioned it he said ‘Amme, this year let us go out and dine in style, shall we?’
‘Excellent, my son,’ Avarachan supported enthusiastically.
But for all Avarachan’s enthusiasm, it was not to be, because Jo had to go to Hyderabad for official purpose during the next week. Though the news dampened his spirits he soon recovered when Jo suggested that we could postpone the celebration to the week end after he arrived. 
Though we rarely talked about it, Alex’s proposal and its practical implications were seldom out of our minds, especially if somebody casually suggested some suitable girl for Jo. The eve of his departure was suddenly upon us. I had set the table and was about to call the menfolk when the phone rang. As Jo was on his way, I asked him to take the call.
At his happy ‘Hi Alex Uncle’ my pulse rate accelerated and I slumped into a chair. From his responses, I could gather that Alex was exchanging pleasantries with him. Then I heard Jo answer ‘Yes uncle, tomorrow morning I am going to Hyderabad on an official tour and while returning we have a halt at Chennai for a meeting. Hence hopefully, we may get a few hours at our disposal to spend at Chennai’ Jo was saying.
After a while I heard him say ‘Yes Uncle, I will surely try to visit them and give you my feedback.’ Then he extended the receiver to me and said ‘Alex Uncle wants you, Amme.’
I was far from being composed. ‘Hello Sarachamme’ Alex’s voice came through. ‘I will call you tomorrow this time, OK?
‘OK’ I echoed, and replaced the receiver.
When we sat down to eat, Jo said with pleasant excitement that Alex Uncle had asked him if he could visit Bindu and Sally on his return journey to get a feel on how they were managing things in his absence.
‘Yes, that is a good idea, Jo’ Avarachan eagerly endorsed.
‘Well yes, I would like to see our career woman in action. But our Thali being what she used to be, I have my reservations as regards her efficiency.’
‘Keep your reservations till you meet her son’ Avarachan said with suppressed excitement.
When I joined Avarachan in the drawing room, he turned down the TV and asked me ‘What did Alex tell you Thara?’
I hadn’t realized that Avarachan had also listened to Jo’s conversation with Alex.
‘Oh, nothing much, just that he would call again tomorrow at the same time’ I told him.
‘That was it? Come on! I wonder why couldn’t he tell you today what he is going to say tomorrow?’ Avarachan said musingly.
‘We will find out tomorrow’ I was not in any mood for making surmises, though the exact thought had crossed my mind too.
In the morning there was a slight drizzle and so Avarachan and Jo started to the airport a little earlier than was necessary.
‘Amme, I wish I had brought some gift from France to give Thali and Bindumama’ Jo said.
‘Hyderabad pearls are famous you know. You can buy some for making a chain either for Bindu or Sally. You know Mone, one of my maternal uncles who worked in Zambia once gave me some pointers on pearl shopping. Though I never had the need to put it to practice I can pass on his words of wisdom to you. Pearls come in all price ranges. Step one is to decide your price range. Check out that range and the next higher range. If you find the higher priced one more appealing, by all means go for that one. Just reduce the quantity of pearls, for the quality will make up for it.’
‘Amme, you are always ready with a solution’ he said, kissing me on the cheek.
In the evening we went for a small walk and then I settled with my book and Avarachan was meddling with the wiring in the drawing room. The time was getting on to 7 PM. ‘Shall we have an early supper, Sara’ Avarachan asked.
‘Why so early Aacha, are you hungry?’
‘Oh no, dear, I just thought that we could wait for Alex’s call leisurely.’
I couldn’t contain my amusement. ‘Are you expecting Alex to convey some momentous development?’ I said almost giggling.
Before Avarachan got time to cover up his embarrassment the phone rang. It was Achayan telling Avarachan that he wanted to meet him without delay if possible. Avarachan was clearly not inclined to budge out of the house. Nevertheless he went. 
I couldn’t guess why Achayan wanted to see him urgently. Since I knew that he badly wanted to hear what Alex had to say I wished the matter at Achayan’s wouldn’t take time. Alex’s expected call came through within five minutes of Avarachan’s departure.
‘Hello, Sarachemme, were you expecting my call?’
‘Why, yes, Alex, we were indeed, but Achayan wanted to see Avarachan on some urgent matter, so you can’t get him on the line now. ‘
‘Oh! I can guess what the urgent matter is Sarachamme’ he said heartily laughing. Then he added ‘So they are in earnest I am sure.’
‘I am afraid, I don’t get you Alex’ I said rather confused.
‘I am sorry, I shall explain. Yesterday morning Bindu called me and diffidently said that Amachy was urging her to call me up and ask me whether I would consider marrying Sally to Johnny. Even though that was my sincere wish, the very idea coming from Amachy was a complete surprise. I asked Bindu what made Amachy suggest it. Sarachamme, what Bindu told by way of explanation amused me no end.’ He paused. 
‘What made her suggest it, Alex?’ I asked totally bewildered.
‘Well it seems an engineer girl working with Johnny finds him attractive and so her aunt who happens to be one of Amachy’s ‘aristocratic’ friends had contacted her to consult about the feasibility of marriage. The aunt was well aware of Johnny’s background but to Amachy’s amazement she didn’t find it objectionable. Amachy simply told her friend that she would enquire and let her know. Amachy’s shrewd brain immediately formulated a plan - if Johnny was good enough for her friend’s niece whose father held the highest position in a Delhi-based firm, why not snatch him up for her own granddaughter, whose marriage prospects were rather dim, at the moment, considering my financial situation’ Alex said.
‘I see’, I said slowly digesting the information. Then I asked ‘What did you tell Bindu? Did you tell her that you had already suggested the idea to us?’
‘No Sarachamme, I didn’t tell her. Let Amachy bask in the credit of her brainwave. But come to think of it I wonder if Avarachayan may blurt it out, not that it matters if he does’ said Alex.
‘Anyway, I told Bindu I have no objection in the matter since I quite like the boy. But I told her I had absolutely no idea on whether Sally and Johnny would be agreeable to the arrangements of the elders. Then I told her about Johnny’s proposed visit while returning from Hyderabad and asked her to keep a watchful eye on the youngsters. ‘
‘Oh Alex, is that why you asked Jo to pay Bindu and Sally a visit?’
‘Partly Sarachamme’ he said.
‘Oh dear, I am afraid things have come to a head’ I said nervously.
‘Supposing Jo is agreeable but Sally isn’t, what then Alex? We can’t bear it if he suffers rejection. You please try to gauge whether Sally would be willing. If she is, then we will ask him. I know you may think we are being over-protective, but there is no help for it Alex. Please try to understand our circumstances.’ 
‘Don’t you worry, Sarachamme, I can well understand your predicament.’
Then as afterthought he said ‘Perhaps our Ammachy may be having some readymade solution to the tricky situations, Sarachamme. Anyway let not that problem worry you overmuch. Take heart for after all, marriages are made in heaven. I am most curious to know the outcome of Avarachan’s meeting with Appa-Ammachy. Shall I call again after an hour?’ he asked.
‘Oh Yes, you may do that’ I said.
Pushing the front door open Avarachan came in his face jubilant with excitement. Seeing that I burst out laughing and he said ‘I see you heard the news from Alex’ he said in a slightly disappointed tone. 
‘Oh! But I am dying to hear what transpired Aacha,’ I said encouragingly. ‘Moreover Alex will be calling again to hear the news.’
‘Well, well, I will tell the details over dinner Thara’ he said.
I quickly set the table and as we started eating Avarachan said ‘When I reached there Achayan and Alice Kochamma were sitting in their veranda with a plate of plump plantains on the coffee table. I sat down and looked at Achayan who uneasily looked at Alice Kochamma and reached for a plantain. I wondered what the matter was. In fact, my wonder grew further when I saw Alice Kochamma fumbling for words which was so unlike her. 
‘You see, Avaracha, we think that you will be looking for a suitable girl for Johnny to marry’ she began haltingly.
‘Yes we think it is time he married’ I said.
I saw Alice Kochamma looking rather helplessly at Achayan, as if she wanted him to take up the thread of conversation. She put the conversation on a hold by reaching for a plantain too.
‘Honestly Sara, I found the situation hilarious and would have asked outright what the matter was. But I let them eat their plantains peacefully. Anyhow Achayan rose to the occasion and he being my brother asked bluntly ‘Hey Avaracha, what do you say to a marriage proposal between our Sally Mol and your Johnny?’
I had long stopped eating and was listening to Aacha’s description open-mouthed. My reaction made him chuckle ‘Can you imagine the shock his words gave me Sara?’
‘Did you tell him that Alex had already made the proposal?’ I asked anxiously.
‘Who do you take me for girl? Do I look like somebody who has FOOL written all over him?’ he asked with disdain. ‘After the shock wore off, I decided to play it cool. I too reached for a plantain and then I asked them what prompted them to make the proposal.’
Then Alice Kochamma explained that they had gathered that Jo was considered an eligible bachelor within her circle of friends. And Alex’s none too good financial position had also to be taken into account which in Alice Kochamma’s opinion must have made him agreeable to the proposal when Bindu suggested it to him.
‘How did you react to her explanation Aacha?’ I asked.
‘Oh I just nodded and made no comment. But her next comment I didn’t like at all and plainly told her so.’ 
‘What did she say Aacha?’ my voice was hardly above a whisper. 
‘Who does she think our boy is? She had the audacity to suggest that her hi-fi friends would hopefully surmise that the children had formed an attachment having known each other from childhood on.’
‘What did you tell her Aacha?’ I asked valiantly swallowing the sour taste Alice Kochamma’s comment gave me.
‘I told her that it was doubtful whether Jo would agree to the proposal. Since Sally has always been like a kid sister to him. Anyway my remark had the effect of bringing her down from her high horse and she said in a placating way that they all admired Johnny very much and that they hoped he would be amenable to their idea. Then we all ate another plantain each and finished up that plate and in a way that act not only concluded the stilted conversation but also helped me to stifle the resentment I felt at their taking our consent in the matter for granted. But the stake being our darling Thali, I couldn’t air it though. So while I got up to leave I purposely put in a formal note when I told them that we have no objection to the alliance provided the kids are agreeable.’
Now I felt it was my turn to mollify Avarahan’s ruffled feelings. So I joined him in the drawing room with our dessert which was also plantains. ‘You see Aacha, according to Alex, one of Alice Kochamma’s high circle friends had enquired about Jo for her highly connected niece who also happens to be his colleague. In fact it was that enquiry which alerted your sister-in-law and led her to make this unexpected move. Hence, Alice Kochamma had to provide a plausible reason for snatching Jo from under her friend’s nose.’
‘Okay, be it as it may, the problem remains the same - we have no idea how the children may receive the idea’ he said.
‘I guess we have to play the waiting game’ I replied.
When Alex dutifully called half an hour later Avarachan conveyed what transpired at Achayan’s. 
‘Now let us wait and see how things develop’ Alex said.



There were three more days to go for Jo’s return. My mind remained restless however hard I tried to be composed. To keep my mind from spinning out of control, I decided to go through my laundry list of mundane tasks that I blatantly procrastinate. My side garden and vegetable garden are always the top two contenders in that list. It has been some time since I tended them. Weeds had sprung up all over the place. I de-weeded the gardens the first day. On the second day, I mulched and trimmed and mixed the organic compost into the soil with vigor. I also planted the next set of seedlings that I had purchased from VFPCK. My feathered friends happily kept me company - you see, my tilling of the soil was bringing up their desserts! 
Through it all my mind remained active, but I still couldn’t think up a suitable manner for broaching the subject to Jo. It will be even more difficult to know the mind of Sally, I reckoned. The thought of consulting Elia Kochamma was uppermost in my mind though it was rather difficult to bring about. In my more philosophical mood, I was successful to keep the matter at bay. 
On the morning of the third day, Jo called from the Hyderabad airport to say that that his meeting at Chennai was in the afternoon and that he hoped to pay a visit to Bindu and Sally in the evening. His plan was to return home by an early morning flight the next day.
Around 11 that day Anila called from the hospital. Her brother’s surgery went off without any complications. The biopsy report would be available only after two weeks or so. They expected to be discharged within 10 days. I hesitated to ask about her ‘James Sir’. But she volunteered the information I longed to hear. Yes the alliance was verbally settled by their respective families. Anila’s brother wanted the marriage to take place as soon as he got discharged if possible. In any case, it would be a quiet affair with just the family members attending. James intends to arrange a wedding reception at the Club Hall the next day. The poor darling’s voice had a happy lilt which touched my heart.
Anila’s call gave me the much needed push to finish the gardening tasks I had set out to conquer. The final step was my favorite. I thoroughly enjoyed moving my plants around based on their flowering pattern. In fact, it was this moving around that gave the garden the much appreciated fresh look. Avarachan had a trolley built for me for this specific task. I always likened this activity of mine to that of a shepherd who knew by instinct the needs of his flock. Avarachan compared it to an efficient valet who managed the guests’ vehicles with ease. Jo being the musician of the family called this part ‘garden tuning’. I was just wrapping up my work when the phone rang yet again.
‘Who could it be at this time?’ I wondered a little apprehensively. 
‘Hi Saraunty’ Sally’s exuberant voice came through. ‘Jocha has just left after paying us a short visit. ‘
‘Wow! I wouldn’t have recognized him, Tharaunty, but for the scar running down the side of his cheek. Not to say that it detracts from his superhero looks,’ she added hastily. 
‘Oh! Thali, you sure are a fillip to anybody’s ego’ I said with a laugh.
‘I do mean it Tharaunty. Even Amma commented on it. As for Mahesh, he is Appa’s assistant you know, he was too impressed to make a wrong surmise even.’
‘What wrong surmise dear?’ I wanted to know.
‘A senseless one Saraunty though it took me some time to make him understand. Anyway, one thing is certain. Now we will have to search far and wide to find a suitable match for him. I shall certainly do my bit. By the way next month I may come over for a friend’s marriage’ she said.
‘Well that is good news dear’ I happily replied.
The thought of Sally’s visit brought a smile to my face. Somehow I felt that my anxieties of the past few days could be swept under the carpet for the time-being. ‘Let Jo come and let us hear his version of the visit’ I told myself.
When Jo did arrive the next day it was almost lunch time. He logged on almost immediately to his office.  I decided to contain my curiosity and waited for him to open up in his own good time. Avarachan was also coming home for lunch.
Jo emerged for lunch from his room with a small packet in his hand. He came up to me and held it out. “Amme, I couldn’t resist buying one set of Hyderabad pearls for you too. Open it and let me know if quality got compromised’ he said.
‘Wow! What fine pearls Jo’ I said. ‘I shall most definitely make a chain with these’ I enthused even as part of my mind was restless. 
As soon as Avarachan joined us he lost no time to enquire about Jo’s visit to Bindu and Sally.
‘Well, we were waiting for you Unki to tell the news. For one thing, I don’t know if you people have seen our Thali - the career woman recently but she certainly gave me the shock of my life’ he said good-humoredly between bites.
I refrained from making any comment because my heart had already started to thud against my ribs.
‘I don’t think we have caught a glimpse of her since she started working. Has she changed much, I mean from our own Thali, son?
He seemed to consider the question seriously. Then he smiled and said. ‘Nah! Unki, deep down she is our own Thali as you put it, but on the outside there is a fine veneer of sophistication we are unused to. When I went to their place she was discussing some business matter with Alex Uncle’s assistant. Actually he could be one or two years older than her but her dealings with the boy left no doubt in anybody’s mind as to who the boss was. That is what I meant by her newly acquired sophistication.’ 
Then as an afterthought he added softly ‘Still I don’t know whether such propinquity is good for either of them. 
‘I see,’ Avarachan responded thoughtfully.
‘In my opinion, it is time they started looking for a nice boy for her. But of course it is up to them to decide’ said Jo.
A quick glance at Avarachan’s face made my heart skip a beat. I felt breathless and while blindly reaching for a glass of water inadvertently knocked down a plate of banana chips off the table with the chips flying all around the place.
‘It is all right. I will clear up the mess’ Jo said almost jumping up.
‘Be careful with the broken pieces’ Avarachan called out.
While Jo was clearing the mess, I averted my face to Avarachan so that he might not see the glee I felt at stalling a sure disaster which Avarachan’s impulsive words would have caused.
After lunch Jo went back to his room and soon we could hear snatches of his conference call. 
While I was at the sink washing up, Avarachan came up behind me and said with a hint of irritation in his voice ‘Thara! Why did you have to spoil the God given chance to open the subject of Alex’s proposal by crashing the plate? You have no idea how close I was to seizing the moment.’
I turned and could not contain the mirth I felt at seeing his disappointment. ‘But Aacha, you don’t understand the situation - supposing Jo is agreeable and Sally not. Have you considered how it may affect him? As for crashing the plate - you should know it was an accident!’
He stood still for a full minute and then said mildly.
‘Well, I suppose that would be an unpleasant situation.’
‘Yes, that is it, Aacha. Let us wait until we hear from Alex and Bindu’ I said.
‘Yup, let us serve chips in unbreakable plates from now on’ he said resignedly and left the kitchen.
All through the morning my mind was uneasily dwelling on the possibility of either Alex or Bindu calling to gather Jo’s impressions about his visit to their place. As no such call came through during the day a nagging worry began to plague my mind with the unwelcome thought that perhaps they might have dropped the idea. 
‘If it is so, it is all for the best’ my brain told me but my heart refused to accept it. 
The first thing Avarachan asked on his return from work was whether either Alex or Bindu had called. But unlike me he appeared to be unruffled hearing my reply and even tried to be jovial by saying ‘No news is good news - ain’t it Thara?’ 
‘I see the rain Aacha, you see the rainbow’ I said a bit morosely.
But the day after, Bindu did call me around eleven in the morning. As I had seldom talked with her over the phone, the conversation was stiff though we both tried to make it lively. The gist of what she conveyed was that though they had thoroughly enjoyed Jo’s visit, it was doubtful whether the youngsters would consider their elders’ wish palatable. Bindu hinted it would be better to know the reaction of Jo to the proposal first. As I had just the reverse idea I replied that we would think about it and let her know and hung up.
As Avarachan was not coming home for lunch, I made myself a sandwich a bit early and then went to the side veranda. I had thought of reading the latest ‘Reader’s Digest’ which had just arrived. I spent a few minutes surveying the garden which looked like it just had a neat haircut and I congratulated myself for a job well-done. I then settled down on my comfortable chair with the Digest but soon found my mind wandering over the present problem. ‘Oh God! If only some miraculous solution would present itself!’ I prayed fervently.



We were returning from Jo’s belated birthday dinner at the City Plaza, a recently opened fabulous restaurant. Though we all enjoyed it thoroughly, I couldn’t help feeling that Jo was somehow not quite his usual happy, pleasant self. It was as though something worried him. His behavior was quite normal when he went to the office the day after he returned from Hyderabad. But when he returned I immediately sensed something was amiss. For one thing, his usual happy smile was missing. I wondered whether Avarachan had sensed it.
‘Are you not well Mone?’ I asked him anxiously.
‘I am fine - just the travel’ he replied.
‘Why don’t you turn in a little early - that way you can catch a little extra sleep and have a good night’s rest’ I advised him.
But his mood hadn’t improved the next day either. He appeared moody and absent minded when he returned from the office. 
I wanted to ask what the matter was but he forestalled me by saying ‘Amme, I have some work to finish before dinner. I should be done by the time Unki gets home’ and went to his room.
When Avarachan returned and we were having dinner there was an even flow of conversation between father and son concerning the recent price hike of petrol. But my sensitive ear could pick Jo’s lack of attention. This was the third evening and I had a good mind to ask him what worried him as soon as we reached home while Avarachan was engrossed in TV. But as soon as we reached home Jo had brushed past us bidding ‘Good Night’ rather hastily. As I lay in bed my mind was restless with anxiety over Jo’s behavior. Was he having some trouble with his work at the office? I worried. Anyway, tomorrow being Saturday, I would ask him point-blank, I decided and went to sleep.
Soon after breakfast Avarachan went with a friend to visit an old buddy of theirs in the hospital. Jo was in moving the keyboard from the drawing room to the side veranda. He usually did this when he was going to have a long practice session. Though he was not the main organist at the church he was the first back up. Whenever ‘the boys’ performed he was the lead player. 
After clearing the dining table, I didn’t tarry to wash up, but went straight to Jo and sat down facing him from one of the cane chairs. It couldn’t be anything other than some official problem, I felt sure and in that case discussing the matter with somebody might prove beneficial. I had decided not to beat about the bush so I asked him straight ‘Mone, is something worrying you? Did anything go wrong at the office?’
He slowly turned his head towards me while his fingers finished the line.
‘No Amme, by God’s Grace, I have no problem regarding my official duties’ he paused as he tried out a couple of different chords. 
‘God! Then it is something personal’ I guessed and a feeling akin to fear made my heartbeat faster.
‘Did you have a tiff with a colleague Jo?’ I asked.
A faint smile hovered over his lips and he said ‘You are not far off the mark Amme, even though the colleague happens to be a girl, Elsa Ninan by name, who was transferred to our office from Bangalore around the same time I returned from France this time around.’
‘A girl? Is she married?’ I asked.
‘Oh Amme,’ Jo’s smile widened and took his hands completely off the instrument and faced me squarely ‘I can easily read your train of thought, but sorry to disappoint you, she is not my type. To answer your question though - she is unmarried, one or two years younger than me, quite smart and good looking and very efficient and of course being Delhi-educated is fluent in Hindi. She is got good people skills for sure.’
I kept silent for a few moments. I felt happy that at last he had come out of his shell and was willing to communicate.
‘Well then tell me, how did this girl upset you?’ I asked a little indignantly.
‘Amme, actually she used to be friendly and pleasant enough when we all met at coffee break or at some function etc. But this Monday when I went to the canteen during coffee break she came up to me and said in dead serious tones ‘You are indeed a dark horse, Mr. John Philip’. Before I could recover from the shock her words gave me, she had walked away. Her attitude indicated that I had offended her in some way. But however hard I tried, I couldn’t recall any such incident. I may have eventually let it pass if on Tuesday, if she hadn’t made a strange remark which even now I am unable to comprehend’ Jo said.
‘What did she say, Mone?’ I knew I was expected to make the query but my mind had suddenly become reluctant to hear more about the girl. I felt sure that she would be none other than Alice Kochamma’s friend’s niece. My heart had already started a dull thud-thud against my ribs.
My lack of interest went unnoticed by Jo who was immersed in his own worry.
‘Well, Amme’ he thoughtfully began his eyes unseeingly resting on a bougainvillea ‘I was waiting for the Department conveyance in the evening along with other bus-mates when Elsa suddenly appeared at my side whispering ‘How is your childhood sweetheart John Philip? Convey my congrats to her.’ Before I could gather my wits the bus had come.’ 
‘I really can’t understand why the girl has suddenly turned hostile to me, when all I had was just a nodding acquaintance with her. Anyway, if she continues with her pestering I will have to confront her. Honestly I cannot recall ever exchanging more than a smile with her.’
Hearing his outburst my uneasiness turned into fear. ‘Don’t ask the girl anything Jo, that would be disastrous’ I entreated frantically.
Jo stared at me dumbfounded ‘Why not Amme?’ he asked perplexity writ large on his face.
I stared at him blankly. To give him a coherent explanation was beyond my mental faculty at the moment. Jo came over and putting his hands on my immobile shoulder asked me softly ‘What is it Amma? I see I have somehow upset you greatly. If you prefer, I won’t ask the girl. Satisfied?’ then with a twinkle in his eye, he said nonchalantly ‘But of course Amme, if you have any dark secrets to divulge, go ahead, little Jo is all ears. ‘
That did it. My mind’s stop watch started ticking again. I took hold of his hand and patting it said ‘You see, the girl happens to be our Alice Kochamma’s friend’s niece’ I paused unsure how to proceed further. 
‘But what has it got to do with the situation Amme?’
I knew he owed an explanation but I felt tongue-tied.
‘You leave her alone Son, I will tell you’ Avarachan’s booming voice was heard from beyond the doorway of the veranda. Neither Jo nor I had heard him return. Startled, we turned and to my horror, Avarachan had crossed the room with a purposeful stride towards Jo. I saw Jo subconsciously turn off the sound filler of his keyboard which was still playing. Avarachan dragged my usual cane chair and planted it aside me so that he was also opposite to Jo. He resolutely clasped Jo’s left hand and casting a quick glance at me said ‘Don’t try to stop me, Sara, let me plainly explain the situation to my boy here.’ 
So all I could do was to sit motionless, needless to say, with my heart in my mouth.
‘You see, my son as Sara told you, Kochamma’s intervention is at the root of your problem. One of her so-called high society friends had contacted her to enquire about the feasibility of a marriage proposal between her niece and you.’ 
Avarachan paused and then asked ‘How about that proposal son?’
To my surprise Jo laughed incredulously ‘That girl wanting to marry me! What a funny situation! Oh no, Unki, Elsa is not my type at all - sorry, there is no scope for a proposal’ he said. Then he added ‘Can you explain why she is harping on a childhood sweetheart?’
‘Well, I am coming to that son’ Avarachan said. Even though his easy manner hadn’t deserted him, I could sense that a note of hesitation had crept into his voice. He leaned back in his chair and let out a low chuckle as if he found something highly amusing.  ‘What a quick-witted lady our Alice Kochamma is, Eh Thara’ he said and tilting his head towards Jo added ‘She lost no time to size up the situation and to turn it to her own advantage. Can you believe it son? She simply told her friend that your affections were engaged elsewhere.’
‘What!’ exclaimed Jo ‘Why did she do that? If it was to put a spoke in her friend’s wheel that was a most deplorable action’ he said disgustedly.
‘Oh dear, the situation is getting out of control’ I wailed inwardly.
‘Just one more thing Unki, I would like to know whom she presented as the object of my affections. Or is she just a fictional figure?’
I could feel Avarachan squirming but somehow he managed to give a flippant reply. 
‘Who else son - our dear old Thali’
A stunned silence followed. Jo had his gaze fixed on Avarachan, his face drained of color. Avarachan was getting uneasy being the target of Jo’s unseeing stare. I had to step in and say something to relieve the tension.
‘But then Mone, Thali is really our sweetheart, isn’t she?’
My intervention had the desired effect. Jo slowly turned towards me and asked ‘But Ammachy didn’t mean it in that sense, did she?’ 
His question deserved a direct answer which I dared not give. Avarachan came to my rescue.
‘Johnny, don’t let us be too harsh on Kochamma - she being the doting grandmother of Thali could be forgiven for wanting to grab the most eligible guy for her granddaughter, you see’ Avarachan said placatingly.
Jo took a few moments to digest this information.
‘But Unki, I fail to understand, how do I fit in the role of eligible guy for Thali - she is my relative isn’t she?’ Jo asked in puzzlement.
Now there was no pussy-footing the delicate issue. I desperately wanted to give a light-hearted reply to ease the mounting tension.
I felt rather than saw the imploring look Avarachan cast in my direction. He had run out of steam. Diplomacy was never his middle name. 
‘Aha! Jo dear, you and I are indeed related to her. She is your cousin’s daughter and I her mother’s aunt. But you see son, neither of us is her blood relative as your Unki is’ I said keeping my tone as light as possible. 
Jo looked at Avarachan for corroboration, it seemed.
‘Yes son, Sara has correctly given you the facts. I hope, now you understand why there is no impropriety as such in suggesting a marriage proposal between Thali and you’ Avarachan said.
‘I see’ Jo replied slowly as if he had difficulty in taking in the implications of the information.
But then to my great surprise within moments, his face cleared and a slow smile with a tinge of amusement appeared on his face.
‘Amme, all things considered Ammachy deserves my sincere thanks on one count. Otherwise, I would have been hard put to avoid Elsa’s unwelcome interest in me. ‘ 
His smile broadened into a chuckle ‘If ever our Sally gets wind of Ammachy’s super-clever move, the poor old grandma will have to run for cover, I am sure.’
He turned back slowly to his keyboard ‘If you two will excuse me I have to nail down these new songs by afternoon’ he said and was soon immersed in the music world. ‘I am out all evening for choir practice.’ 
I too got up and went straight to the kitchen sink to wash up. As I expected Avarachan came after me and putting his arms around my back whispered in my ear ‘What a day, Thara! Stop doing the dishes, girl and let us just pat each other’s back for having deftly dealt with the tricky situation. We really are made for each other, Thank God’ he smacked a kiss on my right cheek. 
‘As for me, I am mighty thankful you turned up at the right moment Aacha’ I said feelingly.
‘I hope the open discussion has put Jo’s heart at ease. Not blowing my horn, but Sara, I have to say, I am quite impressed with the way I fielded his questions’ Avarachan said
He was about to leave when he suddenly said ‘Hey Sara, don’t forget to shut the front door when I go out. It is not safe nowadays.’
During lunch and supper we all studiously avoided mentioning the issue.
Later in the privacy of our bedroom we tried to analyze the possible inferences we could arrive at. After going through Jo’s reactions and responses with a fine-toothed comb many times over we came to the happy conclusion that if Alex made a formal proposal, Jo may not be averse to it.



Next day, we went a little earlier than usual to church. Jo was doing the keyboard and the choir wanted one last try of the three songs. I met Anila at the gate. She took me aside and said that she had hoped to meet me at church so that she could invite me in person to her wedding the next Monday. It was to be solemnized at the Chapel near her home. I readily agreed, my mind having made a lightning decision to visit Elia Kochamma on my way back.
Monday and Tuesday went past without incident. Although I was curious to know how Jo had managed his colleague, I dared not make a reference to it. But Wednesday evening he told me with a smile ‘Oh Amme, our office grapevine has it that Elsa is getting married to an Engineer working in the US and hence is resigning her job after two months. Now I think I needn’t have made such heavy weather of her remarks. Anyway I gladly wish her happiness in her married life.’
‘Of course, Mone’ I agreed.
As she had told me, Anila’s wedding was indeed a quiet affair with just the family members and two or three intimate friends of James attending the ceremony. Anila looked radiant. Her face reflected the inner happiness she felt. When Anila introduced James, he clasped my hands and said ‘I am very glad to meet you Saraunty. I know Anila holds you in high regard.’
I gave a short laugh to cover up my embarrassment and quipped ‘There is no need to wish you happiness, because it is evident that you are destined to be.’
‘Thank you Saraunty’ James said softly.
I had earlier telephoned and told Elia Kochamma that I would be stopping by her place after the wedding. So she was already in the verandah and waiting for me. I related to her the incident of Jo getting upset over his colleague’s strange comments which forced us to divulge the role Alice Kochamma had in the matter by dragging in Sally’s name. Understandably Elia Kochamma was curious to know about Jo’s reaction when Sally was presented as his sweetheart.
‘Oh, he was stunned and became quite angry at the highhanded behavior of Alice Kochamma. But then between Avarachan and me, we somehow managed to give him a plausible explanation’ I said and then gave her the full details of what transpired.
Elia Kochamma sat still for a few moments as if digesting the information. Then she said ‘From what you told me, I gather that Johnny got the impression that even though your Alice Kochamma had cooked up the story about him and Sally to spite her friend, there is no impropriety in suggesting a marriage proposal if one wants to. Am I right Sarakutty?’
‘Yes, that is the exact picture Elia Kochamma’ I said. As an afterthought I added ‘Two days ago Jo said that it was rumored in the office that the girl in question was getting married to a guy in the US and would be resigning her job sometime soon. He was most relieved and sincerely wished her happiness.
‘Do you think Johnny would agree to marry to marry Sally if her father makes a former proposal?’ Elia Kochamma asked thoughtfully.
‘Avarachan and I hope so’ I said. ‘But there is a little problem’ I continued hesitatingly. 
‘Prior to the open discussion Jo and I used to have a jolly time in the evenings talking and reminiscing about our past which often brought up Sally’s name and her escapades as a child. But now both of us shy from mentioning her name as if it has suddenly become a taboo. It is a sad state of affairs, because Jo has no one else as a close relative.’
‘Yes, I can see your point’ Elia Kochamma agreed. ‘What about informing Alex and seeking his opinion in the matter?’ she asked.
I thought for a while and said ‘That is a good suggestion Elia Kochamma. I shall talk it over with Avarachan and let you know’ I said bye to her daughter and daughter-in-law and left.
Avarachan being a man of action lost no time in calling up Alex. But as Alex was busy at the moment he agreed to call before noon the next day, which meant I would have to do the talking. Even though I fretted much about the ordeal, once I started, I could put across the situation rather well. When I finished, Alex took his time to respond.
‘Sarachamme, in two week’s I shall be coming over there. Shall we decide then what is to be done?’ he said.
‘Yes, that would be fine’ I told him and hung up. 
‘Well what that means Sara, is that you will have to put up with this stilted atmosphere for another fortnight’ I told myself. 
Both Avarachan and Jo had left in the morning and I resolutely began to do some housecleaning beginning with the windows in the drawing room. Sometimes monotonous hard manual labor kept my mind from fretting futilely.  Hardly had I finished one window when the phone rang and I heard Razia’s drawling voice coming through ‘Are you home Sara? Can I come over and stay two days with you? If I am in the way just say so dear.’
‘Of course I am free. When are you coming?’ I asked with happy anticipation.
‘Around 4 tomorrow evening’ she said.
Out went my blues through the very window whose panes I had just moped clean. The mop and the plastic basin quickly found themselves back in their hidden corner in the work area and I busily started to prepare lunch. 
In the afternoon I decided to bake a chocolate cake and some cookies in Razia’s honor. Razia and I were college mates and hostel-mates for our undergraduate student days. And our bond of mutual affection has stood the test of time. For my part I owe her a debt of gratitude for the loving concern she always had for me. She was married to a doctor working in the US and hence had taken up US citizenship. Prior to her husband’s death a few years back, they used to visit native Kerala every two years and had even bought a flat near their ancestral place for temporary stay. Now it must be three or four years since she came last. Her only daughter and her family were also settled in the US. How her monotonous tones belied her uncanny powers of observation had always fascinated me, although Avarachan was a little uneasy in her presence. But he tolerated her well enough for my sake, I must admit.
The baking took me longer than I had expected with the result that I was not quite done with getting the guest room adjacent to Jo’s room ready when he returned from office. 
‘What is going on Amme?’ he asked happily taking in the aroma. ‘Is somebody coming for a stay?’
‘Do you remember my friend Razia? Well, she is coming for two days’ I replied while getting on with the job in hand.
‘Is she the one settled in the US and who speaks in a leisurely manner?’
‘You have hit the nail on the head, Mone’, I said highly amused.
Razia’s impending visit had brought in a welcome liveliness to our dinnertime conversation.
‘By the way Sara, tomorrow I shall be late because it is our club day. So you needn’t wait up for me’ said Avarachan innocently when he heard of Razia’s imminent visit. I cheerfully rolled my eyes at him.



‘So, you have been here since Easter, Eh Razia? Why didn’t you give me a call so I could come and visit you.’
At Razia’s insistence, we were having tea in the side verandah.
‘You sure know how to make delectable cakes Sara. And to think I pride myself on being an excellent baker’ she said biting into a biggish piece of chocolate cake. 
 ‘Really, I myself had a lot of visiting and travelling to do there being at least two or three weddings and their associated events, 4 or 5 betrothals, not to mention house-warmings etc. of nephews, nieces, and their kids. I still have a month and some more to go hence I have decided to come over here and relax with you. You know, this side garden of yours has grown over the years from being a pleasant patch to a soothing sanctuary that I cannot but unwind here’ Razia continued stretching her legs. ‘I am also a garden person Sara and I know a neglected garden, a status quo garden and an elegant garden when I see them. In your garden here I see no weeds, I see no dead leaves and I see no leggy plants either. I see color-coordinated perfectly positioned plants such that there is no jostling, no competition, no pushing. That is because somebody worked on them carefully, not too long ago. Yup Sara, it is inviting me to chill out.’ 
‘Thanks Razia’ suddenly I felt glad that I had spent three days sprucing the garden up. 
‘Since you would be leaving only the day after tomorrow, we have one full day at our disposal to go somewhere if you wish it’ I said.
 ‘Yes dear, tomorrow I wanna visit a very old aunt of mine, in the nineties, you know, who is an inmate of the Old Age home hereabouts with five star facilities. I hope you know where it is Sara, ‘cos I am depending on you to get me there’ she said.
‘Of course I know it though I haven’t been there yet. It takes about 45 minutes by bus or about 20 minutes by an auto. We can go soon after breakfast and return by lunch time.’
‘No dear, we will dine out in style’ she said.
‘OK, as you say’ I agreed with pleasure. ‘Now if you have finished, let us go in before the mosquitoes come by. Take a shower and make yourself comfortable Razia’ I advised. 
Afterwards Razia and I sat in the drawing room and cozily chatted till Jo came home. In fact, six years had elapsed since her last visit and she was amazed to see the social changes that had taken place during this period. The vast job opportunities brought about by the Information Technology boom had changed the face of the state beyond recognition she opined. Unemployment has more or less become a thing of the past at least among the professionally qualified she presumed. The social functions she had attended during the past month had forcibly underlined the shift in the attitudes and behavior of the present society. Razia said that it amused her no end to see the erstwhile aristocracy forced to rub shoulders with the nouveau riche. And in many homes the elderly parents were living alone, all their children having migrated to the US, UK, Australia, Canada, and even to the farthest New Zealand. Razia felt that the forlorn attitude shown by many a lonely parent was really a façade in that they were secretly proud of their offspring’s non-resident status in society. And Razia wondered how many of the lamenting parents would actually welcome the idea if their children decided to come home after giving up their lucrative overseas jobs. 
‘Sara, in another aspect our society has changed beyond recognition. For you folks, the transformation may have gone unnoticed but to someone like me, it is stunning to say the least. You see, in our days, middle class people found it extremely difficult to give their children decent education and find desirable alliances for their daughters. In my family, for example our father was a school teacher and we were two boys and two girls. Sara, it still pains me to think how our father had to endure a life of hardship and toil for our sake. In those days mothers seldom worked outside their homes, you know. And only a lucky few could make come true their life long wish of building a house of their own even with the gratuity and other pension-related benefits they received at retirement from service. You can’t imagine the happiness it gives me to see that the situation has completely changed thanks to the overall development of our country. Now I see most young couples build their homes before they are forty and lack of money is not a problem for parents to find suitable boys for their daughters. Thank God’ Razia ended her monologue with a happy sigh.
Nevertheless what stunned her most was the freedom the youngsters enjoyed in the matter of marrying anyone of their choice irrespective of caste and creed. As Razia understood it this had become quite common among the high-salaried professionals who were rightly or wrongly convinced that only they and not their aged parents could decide with whom they would be compatible profession wise. In short, she concluded, it was rather funny to see the all-powerful parents of yester years relegated to the role of event managers.
I told her that her reading of the current situation was nearly spot-on. Then I added that nowadays most parents moan that it is getting increasingly difficult to arrange marriages as in the good old days.
‘What about your son Sara? How old is he?
‘Jo turned 27 two weeks ago. We are on the lookout for a nice girl’ I volunteered the information to forestall her sure enquiry.
Just then we heard the gate creak and I went to open the door for Jo. As he knew Razia would be there, he went along to greet her with a warm ‘Hi Aunty, How are you? We haven’t seen you for quite some time isn’t it?’ and sat down beside her on the sofa.
I was watching Razia’s face and felt proud to see the genuine appreciation with which she appraised him. As they sat exchanging pleasantries I brought Jo’s tea and snacks to the front. Soon he got up. 
‘Amme, I have some calls scheduled for the evening. Do you think you can work dinner around my schedule? Else I will just grab something after my call.’
‘That is not a problem at all. Just let us know when’ I said.
As soon as Jo left the room Razia said bluntly ‘Honestly Sara, I never expected him to turn out so well. Why on earth wasn’t he snapped up till now I wonder?’
It was no use trying to quell the surge of pride I felt. But in an attempt to be modest I said softly ‘You see Razia, his mixed parentage can be a deterrent in the minds of prospective in-laws.’
Razia vehemently opposed my viewpoint. ‘Mixed parentage, what hogwash! In this day and age nobody with an iota of sense in his head would mind that aspect. My sincere advice is that you lose no time to find a fine girl for him.'
During dinner, the conversation was led by Razia who entertained us with funny anecdotes about her grandchildren and her own friends. Her deadpan humor made her tales extremely hilarious.
Next day soon after breakfast Razia and I started by bus to visit her old aunt. In my mind an old lady staying in an old age home was a rather sad circumstance. But to my pleasant surprise, Razia’s aunt turned out to be a sprightly eighty plus lady who thoroughly enjoyed her life and who radiated an infectious happiness around her. Our visit was during their Cultural Week and Razia’s aunt was the anchor of a comedy show. Both Razia and I were surprised at the enthusiasm of most of the inmates. The one-hour visit we had planned got extended well beyond lunch with the result that when we reached home I barely got time to get dinner ready before the menfolk returned. 
Razia helped me in the kitchen and we both agreed that contrary to the general belief that old people were unhappy to be living in homes, there were certainly exceptions like her aunt who enjoyed the freedom and companionship of peers such places provided. And as Razia pointed out in that special drawl of hers, after all, it was not the place but your mental makeup that would determine if you smiled or sighed. 
After breakfast the next day Razia bade goodbye to Avarachan and Jo and left us before either of them went to office. At the gate she turned towards Jo and said ‘I’ll be around for almost two more months. Young man, I have a gut feeling that I shall get the chance to attend your wedding to some lucky girl before I leave.’
‘Oh! A fat chance of that’ Jo laughed it off though a blush had crept up his cheeks.



On Saturday morning Jo announced that he and two of his colleagues were going to attend the marriage of a Tamil friend and as the place was some distance away, they would be returning around 8 PM only. It was welcome news to me as both of us were a little ill at ease in each other’s company. Then Avarachan unexpectedly suggested going for a picnic to the nearby waterfall. I jumped at the idea and we spent a most enjoyable day pushing all the nagging worries and anxieties, if not out of the mind altogether, at least under a dust cover.
When Jo returned he was in good spirits having enjoyed the trip. He said that the various ceremonies the bride and the groom had to perform during the marriage were quite amusing.
Monday morning soon after Avarachan and Jo left home, I had a call from Geetha. The last time I heard from her was two months back. Hari was still in the US and had invited them to visit him before he came back. I remember having urged her to do that.
‘Hello Saraunty, guess who is calling and from where?’ Geetha’s excited voice came through.
‘Hi Geetha, I am assuming you are in the US now, am I right?’ I asked quite thrilled.
‘Oh Saraunty, I am so happy that I don’t know how to convey the news. Our Hari’s marriage is fixed. The girl is a doctor who is now doing her internship. The wedding is to be solemnized within three weeks. We came over here last week,’ she said in one breath.
‘I am delighted to hear the news Geetha. How did the alliance come about? I am all agog to hear the details’ I said.
‘Saraunty, to tell you the truth, I myself can’t comprehend the blessings coming our way. Now for details, the girl’s name is Minu and she is three years younger to Hari. She has an elder sister who is married and well settled here. The parents had migrated to US some twenty five years ago. Minu’s aunt has been the mediator and she lives in the same block of apartments as Hari and his colleague. Hari and his friend were invited for a birthday party at the aunt’s house, where he met Minu for the first time. She being quite pretty and well-behaved must have made a good impression on him because when the parent’s contacted us with a marriage proposal he was only too willing to consent.’ 
‘Raviyettan and I had decided before our US trip that our secret will be ours forever. But to be honest we came so close to sharing this with Minu’s folks.  We gave the green signal right away and decided to conduct the marriage without delay. How I wish you could come for the wedding! Anyway we will be returning home soon after and then we will come over to meet you all.’ 
‘Yes, I’d dearly have loved to attend, but as it is a futile wish we would have to make do with the photographs. I am so thrilled for you all’
‘By the way Saraunty, what is going on with Johnny? I am sure you would be on the lookout for a nice girl - right?’
‘Of course we are, my dear. I’ll let you know in due course.’
‘So long Saraunty, I’ll call you later’ she said and hung up.
Geetha’s call filled my mind with such happiness that I felt I would burst if I didn’t convey it to somebody. But I couldn’t impart the main reason to anyone. So I tried to keep my feelings under control by taking up some elaborate cooking all the while yearning for Jo’s earlier return.
And Jo did turn up at least half an hour earlier than usual but when I opened the door for him he stole my thunder by saying ‘I have exciting news for you Amme - our Hari is getting married to a doctor in the US. Geethaaunty and Uncle are already there. Hari emailed me.’
‘Oops! I was waiting the whole day for telling the news. Geetha phoned me in the morning. Hari is such a nice boy. May God shower his choicest blessings upon the couple.’ I said fervently. 
‘Amme, I smell cutlets. Can I have one just now?’ he asked and taking not one but two, popped then one by one into his mouth. Usually he ate anything only after his shower. While munching he said ‘Most people I know prefer their cutlets soaked in ketchup. I like it just plain. Then I get to relish the harmony between meat, potato, onions and the spices.’
‘You know what? Amme, in our office it seems to be the wedding season now with some four or five in the offing, two chronic bachelors topping the list.’ Jo said with his face turned away from me. His next words came out in something of a rush ‘perhaps it wouldn’t be a bad idea if you fix up somebody for your daughter-in-law. What do you say?’ He asked with seeming nonchalance and faced me.
His question was so unexpected that it left me breathless for a few seconds. However I recovered my poise and laughingly said ‘Yes, yes let us also hurry up and not miss the auspicious season Jo.’
It was one thing to give a witty reply but I kept tossing and turning in bed almost all night, my mind uneasy and restless mulling over Jo’s words. I felt sure that he was trying to convey his stand on something. Though I couldn’t think up what that something might be, I had a vague suspicion that it had to do with Kochamma’s insinuation.
As luck would have it, Alex phoned before noon on Tuesday ‘Sarachamme, I shall be coming that way during this weekend. I hope to arrive on Friday evening and to leave for Chennai the next morning. I have a good mind to meet Johnny and have an informal chat with him. Actually I have no recollection of his personality, not that it is going to make any difference regarding the proposal I made’ he said.
‘Alex, I am so glad you will be meeting Jo.’
‘Why the urgency Sarachamme?’ he asked.
I hesitated to give him a direct reply. Instead I said haltingly ‘I just thought it was about time you knew him personally, Alex.’
‘Ok, so be it then’ said Alex.
I told Avarachan about Alex’s impending visit and his intention of meeting Jo, but I kept mum about my uneasiness over Jo’s words.
‘Really Sara, I wish Alex would settle the issue one way or the other, I am past caring which way so long as the uncertainty gets resolved’ Avarachan said with feeling.
‘Ditto here’ I said quietly.



On Friday, after the menfolk left for work, I had half a mind to call up Elia Kochamma for conveying the latest developments. But I decided to call her after Alex’s visit. After all, what is the point in having a piecemeal of a conversation, when in a matter of few hours I will have more information? As the afternoon wore on, the initial relief I felt at Alex’s coming began to wane and a nameless anxiety took its place. If only Avarachan would come earlier than Jo, I wished fervently. That wish was granted almost immediately but what he had to convey made me even more ill at ease. Achayan had called Avarachan to take me to their place for meeting Alex as soon as Jo came back.
‘What is the need for this last minute drama? Alex was supposed to come here and meet Jo, wasn’t it?’ I asked Avarachan crossly.
‘Thara, I pondered over Achayan’s call a bit and it gave me a headache. So take my advice girl - don’t even try to think about it - just relax. Can you get me a strong cup of tea in the meantime? he said.
‘I might as well make one for Jo also, since we have to go to Achayan’s soon after’ I said walking up to the kitchen.
I hadn’t heard Jo coming in but when I was pouring Avarachan’s tea into the cup, I heard Avarachan telling him that we were going to Achayan’s.
‘Is something wrong?’ Jo asked with a tinge of anxiety in his voice.
It was I who replied ‘Oh! Nothing wrong Mone. Alex has just come over there that is all’
‘That is good news’ he said and went to his room.
‘Your tea and snacks are on the dining table Jo. We are going. Don’t forget to lock the door’ I called out.
Though the distance between the two houses was not much, as ours was set back, the front of Achayan’s place was not visible until we turned the corner. We found Alex waiting just around the corner with the intention of meeting us before we got any farther. He held out an envelope and said, ‘You see, I have written a note for Johnny to read. I want him to know that I have made a proposal of marriage between him and Sally before I went to Dubai and have asked him to let me know whether he is agreeable, without any delay, if possible. I haven’t told Appa and Ammachy about the note so they are under the impression that I just want to see the boy.’
‘Okay, let it be so, you go and meet Jo’ Avarachan said readily.
As for me I couldn’t have found my voice to tell him what Avarachan told him. I was too bewildered to comprehend the consequences with the result that I sat on a chair like a mannequin in Achayan’s place without registering anything that went around me. When I saw Alex turning the corner, I couldn’t bear it any longer and stood up to leave.
‘Don’t go yet, let us hear what Alex has to say’ Alice Kochamma said in a friendly way.
‘Oh! There isn’t much to tell, except that he is a very nice chap and that our girl should consider herself lucky to get him’ Alex said smiling.
Under normal circumstances Alex’s words would have landed me on cloud nine, but now I was filled with anxiety mixed with a nameless fear at Jo’s possible reaction. 
Avarachan was in no mood to hang out at Achayan’s any longer than I was. ‘Let us be going - Good Night everybody’ he said holding my hand and we hurried down the steps.
We were still a few feet away from our front door. It was wide open. Jo was standing near the telephone stand looking at the note. Our footsteps made him turn sharply and holding out Alex’s note towards us he said with an expression of disbelief on his face ‘Please read this and tell me what it means.’
‘Exactly what it says my son - don’t misunderstand Alex’ Avarachan said smilingly.
‘But Unki, you don’t understand, why should he wish me as his son-in-law, I would like to know’ said Jo.
‘I don’t think you have to agonize over that Mone’ I intervened. ‘We have just heard Alex telling Alice Kochamma and Achayan that Sally should consider herself lucky if you are agreeable to the proposal.’
He took a few moments as if to digest what I had conveyed. ‘If Alex Uncle is bent on having me as the monkey on his back it is his problem. I am not going to sweat over it. I am concerned about you two -how do you view it?’
‘Thali has always been like our own daughter, so how can we have any objection son?’ Avarachan put in a counter question. ‘It is you who have to decide one way or the other.’
Jo again took a few moments to reply.
‘Supposing, just supposing, I am amenable, what then?’ he asked.
‘Why, in that case, I shall tell Alex right away’ said Avarachan happily with an air of expectancy.
Suddenly to our great relief Jo laughed ‘Not so fast Unki, I was just thinking aloud, you know.’
Though his face fell Avarachan valiantly said ‘We would never force you to do something you don’t want to son. So take your time to decide. After all, it is your life and we only want you to see you happily married, to the girl of your own choice. May God guide you.’
‘Jo, it is already later than our usual time for dinner. Be ready for dinner in half an hour’ I said.
Avarachan had started on his dinner when Jo made his entry. His demeanor had completely changed. He was smiling as if amused over something. He must have noticed the look of wonder on my face. Before sitting down he came up to me, put his hand on my shoulder and said ‘Amme, there is indeed a funny angle to the issue’ Jo said.
‘What do you mean Jo?’ I asked.
Even Avarachan had stopped eating and was watching Jo wonderstruck.
‘Well, well. Just imagine the reaction of our Sally dear, when told about the mad proposal. I have no doubt at all that she would raise hell and Alex Uncle and Bindumama will have to run for cover’ said Jo  ladling curry from the dish.
‘That is possible’ I agreed. ‘But Jo, her opinion will be sought only after getting a positive reply from you.’
‘Oh! In that case , I think you can safely inform that I have no particular objection provided Sally agrees to it of her own free will’ said Jo slowly, choosing the words with utmost care especially the last few ones.
So far Avarachan had been a silent listener.
‘That is what I call a fast decision. Now son, from what you have just said, can we take that you are making your decision of your own free will?’
Avarachan’s blunt question seemed to have surprised him.
He looked up at Avarachan and solemnly said ‘Of course Unki. But I have something to add on’ he started hesitantly and then the words came out in a rush. ‘That is, whatever be the outcome let it never affect our happy cordial relations with one another. Also I expect Sally to make up her mind within a maximum period of one week and if it is ‘Yes’ I would like the wedding to take place before the end of next month positively.’
‘That is fair enough, I believe said Avarachan. Then he added ‘If Jo can be this quick why should Unki be slow? I might as well call up Alex right now and tell him’ and moved to the telephone stand after washing up.
‘Oh my God!’ my involuntary exclamation at the sudden turn of events caught Jo’s attention.
‘What is it Amme? Shall I ask Unki not to call Alex Uncle?’
‘Oh! Don’t do that. Let him call Alex right away. There is nothing to be gained by tarrying. Jo dear, may I know why you are particular about the time factor?’
‘I think Amme, it is best for all concerned’ I had to be satisfied with that non-specific answer.
As we went on with our meal silently Avarachan was talking over the phone louder than usual so that we could also hear what exactly he was saying. He correctly conveyed all the relevant points and hung up.
‘Well Alex is quite happy to hear the news. He also feels that the principle of ‘the earlier the better’ holds good in this case and so he is going to find out Sally’s stand in the matter. As Johnny said, Alex is also expecting some initial resistance from her, but he is hopeful she may come around’ Avarachan ended happily.
Both Jo and I had finished eating and he said ‘Goodnight’ and turned to leave. After taking four or five steps he stopped and came up to me. ‘There is one thing more Amme, I don’t want to talk to her over the phone, and so if at all she wants to say something, you’ll have to be the go-between. I don’t relish being the target of her ravings and rantings.’
‘God! Things have come to a head all too suddenly’ I uneasily thought while washing up. In the privacy of our bedroom, Avarachan told me that now the ball was in Sally’s court and hence we could breathe easy for a few days at least. He wondered whether Jo’s apparent lack of concern was genuine or not and also about Sally’s response. From experience I knew that Avarachan would be doing the breathing easy part. I knew I would be fretting and worrying about everything and anything. And Jo would be somewhere in the middle.
Next day was Friday. Alex must have reached home around noon I figured. That means I could expect a frantic call from Sally only by night. But no call came during the night or on Saturday either. As far as I knew, Alex would be leaving on Sunday afternoon. It could be that she would open up only after he left, I told myself. 
One of the ‘pazhakolas’ from our garden had reached the ripe-for-jam stage. Since I could manage only half a ‘kola’ in one sitting this was always a two-day chore. As I dislike cooking anything else on ‘jam’ days I did some bulk cooking for the weekend on Friday. Saturday and Sunday were taken up mostly by the jam and that action helped me cope wonderfully. Now this was a task I remember my mother routinely doing all those years ago that I never found ‘jam making’ a drag. Though Avarachan didn’t comment on the lack of communication from Sally, I could feel that it was uppermost on his mind for I noticed him busy doing his yard work without any cajoling from me. Messing about the yard was not something he relished, in spite of his athletic build. But when Sally didn’t call on Sunday I couldn’t help getting restless. The concert with the boys at the orphanage kept Jo out of home for the most part of the weekend. On the whole it was a great relief to me when Monday morning dawned and Avarachan and Jo left home for work.
Now that I was alone in the house my suppressed thoughts and feelings threatened to engulf me and I found myself sitting on the chair by the phone-stand and staring at the phone. But after a minutes when the phone did ring it startled me, nervousness making my hands limp. It was Bindu calling.
‘Hello Sarachamme, I know you will be waiting to hear from us. I just waited for everyone to leave so that I could peacefully give you all the details Sally is not here, she has gone to her work-site. Alex left yesterday evening.’
‘As Johnny expected Sally to make up her mind within a week, Alex opened the subject soon after dinner on Friday itself. He told her that we thought it was time we looked up a nice boy for her to marry and settle down. Her immediate response was ‘Oh no Appa - not for a few years at least. I want to see our business flourishing once again. You needn’t worry about me Appa, after all two or three years are not all that long.’
My heart had begun its usual thud-thudding. If only Avarachan were here! He could have calmly dealt with the situation.
‘What did Alex say to that?’ I was expected to make that query I knew.
‘Well, I saw Alex was finding it difficult to coax her into accepting his view point. Every time they argue I realize that they are so alike. Then Alex got an unexpected opening from Sally herself. 
She said teasingly ’Oh! Come on Appa, have you found a Prince Charming for little Sally?’ and laughed out enjoying her own joke.’ 
Alex smiled with relief and said ‘Yes, that is precisely what it is my dear. In fact I like him so much that I have already made a marriage proposal to his parents. They have informed me that the boy has no objection to the alliance provided you agree to the match of your own free will. And he expects you to make up your mind within a week that is by next Thursday.’
Abruptly all traces of humor vanished from Sally’s face and she slowly asked ‘Is he a son of one of your old circle of friends Appa?’ 
‘Oh no dear, actually you know him very well and therefore he is very particular that if you are not in favor of the alliance it shouldn’t affect the existing cordial relations between the families.’ Alex paused for a moment and then said quietly. ‘Sally, I am talking about Johnny, that is your Jocha.’
‘At that Sarachamme, Sally’s face froze, her gaze unseeingly fixed on Alex.’
Alex got up and patting Sally’s shoulder said ‘Don’t be too upset Mol, you have a week’s time to make up your mind. Pray for God’s guidance and decide. Bindu, I have a meeting in half an hour’s time. I’d like a cup of hot tea.’ With that we left her and went to the dining room.
While Alex drank tea, we could see Sally sitting motionless. Soon after Alex left to meet his assistant. I have to confess Sarachamme this was one instance that I wished I could disappear too. When I turned after closing the front door, Sally got up and faced me squarely ‘You tell me Amma, how I can marry Jocha? He is my own cousin or uncle isn’t he?’
‘He indeed is my cousin which makes him your uncle-equivalent as you say dear, but you must also understand that he is not a blood relation of mine’ I said as calmly as I could.
She, keeping her eyes intently on mine asked bluntly ‘Are you telling me that it is quite in order, if we decide to marry each other?’
‘Yes Sally, that is it’ I replied keeping my voice steady.
Her face crumpled ‘But Amme, can’t you see what an unthinkable situation it is? What will people think?’
I patted her hand and said ‘I know dear, but he is such a fine boy that your Appa likes him or rather admires him very much. As for what people think, they can go and fly kites for all I care’ 
Then I hastily added ‘Our liking him need not influence your decision in any way. From what I heard, Johnny too was shell-shocked at first to hear about the proposal. Anyway, you think about it and take your own decision which is what Johnny wants you to do.’ After that I went on to prepare dinner.
‘Sarachamme, so far Sally has not said anything on the subject. We are just hoping she wouldn’t keep us in suspense much longer. I am usually an unruffled person, but with Sally’s silence I cannot help but feel that drama is my lot’ She paused for a moment and then asked ‘How is Johnny getting along?’
‘Bindu, he appears quite unaffected’ I told her. Then I added ‘Maybe it is because he doesn’t expect Sally to consent.’
‘As for me I am crossing my fingers that Sally will accept the proposal’ said Bindu.
‘Me too’ I echoed her sentiments and hung up.
‘So that is that - well it is after all their lives. We are just the onlookers’ said Avarachan philosophically when I told him what Bindu had conveyed.
Elia Kochamma had also called me in the afternoon and I had given her a detailed update. ‘May the good Lord guide the children’ is all what she said.
On Tuesday while we were having dinner, the phone rang and Avarachan answered it ‘Hello. Sally dear, we were all waiting for your call’ he blurted out. ‘Sure I will call her.’ 
Turning to me he said a trifle sheepishly ‘Sara, Sally wants you.’
My heart stopped beating. I couldn’t stand up on my leaden feet. I heard Jo whispering to me ‘Take it easy Amme, some deep breathing will help - go and talk to her.’
Like a sleep walker I went and mumbled ‘Hello Thali’
‘Saranty, please take a paper and a pen and write down what I am going to say.’
Since we always had a well-stocked telephone stand, I easily said ‘Go ahead, I am ready.’
‘Here I go Saranty, ‘Dear John Philip Abraham, if it is God’s will, I am agreeable to the proposal that my Appa made because I have a specific reason for my decision.’ That is all Saranty. You please give it to him and let Unki also read it. Bye Saraunty.’
I replaced the receiver and stood staring at the paper without registering a thing. As if in a dream, I felt Avarachan taking the note from my hands and heard him calling out to Jo that it was for him. Suddenly my senses returned alerting my mind to the need for tackling the issue with sensitivity.
Jo was bent over at the wash basin. It seemed to me that he took an incredibly long time to straighten up and dry his hands on the towel. Avarachan was already standing behind him holding out the note with barely concealed excitement. Jo’s face was quite impassive as he took it.
‘Sally dictated it to me, Jo’ I said stating the obvious for want of something better to say.
‘I see’, he said absent-mindedly, his eyes skimming over it. 
‘Jo, do pass the note to Unki when you are done’ I said. ‘Aacha, she wants you to read it too.’
Slowly Jo raised his face and handed it to Avarachan. 
‘Oh! You can keep it son, I couldn’t help reading it while Amma was writing it down’ Avarachan said unabashedly with a huge grin. In spite of the situation I couldn’t help being reminded of the Cheshire Cat. Then with a twinge of anxiety he asked ‘Aren’t you happy Johnny?’
Jo didn’t reply immediately.
‘Is the ‘reason’ as she puts it bothering you?’ I asked.
In a jiffy, his grim expression changed to one of pure mirth. ‘Aww, Please! Come on you poor dears!’ he said spreading out his arms to hold us in a loose embrace.
‘Amme, you can dictate a return note to her right now.’ He led the way to the phone.
Jo taking a pen jotted down a few lines on the same paper and gave it to me.
‘Dear Sally, thank you for agreeing to go by the wishes of our elders. However don’t be too surprised if your reason and mine turn out to be one and the same.’
As I had no choice in the matter, I just called up Sally and asked her to take down what Jo wanted to tell her. I’d dearly have loved to hear her comment on it, but she only said ‘OK Saraunty, Good Night.’
Jo was not in any mood to talk either. As soon as I turned to face him he said ‘Goodnight’ and left.
 ‘Just a minute Johnny’ Avarachan told him. ‘I am going to ring Alex for fixing the date of the marriage - if possible before the end of next month as you already told us.’
‘Sure Unki, you may do so.’
 ‘Thara  - all these reasons back and forth are really above my head. But I am not bothered ‘cos I don’t need a reason. I am really, really happy’ Avarachan said contendedly.
When Avarachan called Alex, he had already been informed of Sally’s decision by Bindu and hence was waiting for Avarachan’s call for confirmation. As neither we nor Alex had been in favor of a grand wedding, the ceremony could be solemnized as Johnny had suggested and they even decided upon the twenty eighth of next month as a tentative date. Avarachan then proceeded to call Achayan and then Jo’s uncle, Thomaskutty with whom he had maintained contact throughout the years. 
Thomaskutty was delighted to hear the happy news and expressed his willingness to attend the wedding probably accompanied by his younger son Suraj. I couldn’t help being amused at the way Avarachan proudly described the prestigious alliance he could contract for Jo. Surely Avarachan was in his element and I was expected to listen and act upon the various necessary arrangements as he chalked them out one by one.
Next morning when Avarachan and Jo left home I passed on the good news to Elia Kochamma. I was a tad surprised to hear that all along she had an inkling about the outcome.
Calling up the painters for doing up the house was the number one item in Avarachan’s list. He did that without any delay. Though the painters has assured us to finish their job within ten days when they actually left the scene nearly three weeks had gone by. While the painters were busy inside the house, I worked on the outside, mainly to get out of their way. You see, our painters have the tendency of taking over the entire house when they come to paint. It worked to everyone’s advantage though. By the time the painters left the outside looked picture perfect. The date of the wedding had been pushed ahead to the twenty-sixth due to the Vicar’s convenience. Avarachan was busy with the printing of invitation cards and once they had been delivered he was even busier with the task of mailing them to relatives and friends. 
As for me, I was engrossed in the most arduous job of cleaning and rearranging the interior of the house which took up another week.  The fresh coat of paint put our existing curtains to shame in no time and I decided to go for new curtains. On the whole, one month had elapsed and now remained barely three weeks and a hundred and one items to attend to. During this period there was hardly any time for the three of us to be together during meal times even. Hence it was a slight shock to watch Jo silently eating his dinner one day. Avarachan being in his usual exuberant mood was mainly addressing me to make a list of our friends and relatives we intended to invite in person. Then he turned towards Jo and asked ‘Have you invited your officemates and friends son? Just give me a rough head-count so we can make arrangements with the caterers.’
Jo looked up and I saw that he hesitated before replying. ‘I shall tell you in the morning’ and got up. 
‘What is the matter now with that boy?’ I fretted inwardly.
My puzzlement grew when instead of joining Avarachan in the drawing room he said ‘I have some work to complete. Goodnight.’
All the while I was doing the dishes and cleaning the kitchen the withdrawn face of Jo kept tormenting me. As I couldn’t bear it any longer, I decided to talk it out with him. I shut the kitchen door and softly went along the side of the drawing room on to the closed veranda to which Jo’s bedroom opened. I saw Avarachan sitting at the writing desk at the far end of the drawing room - probably writing out an invitation to some left-out crony of his. 
Through the half open door I could see Jo sitting motionless and staring blankly in front of his laptop which has not been turned on yet. My gentle tap on the door seemed to startle him. By the time he turned and stood up, I had entered and sat on the side stool. I asked him to sit down. Then without any preamble, I asked ‘Tell me Jo dear, what is the matter with you?’
He didn’t reply immediately but went on studying the floor pattern for some time. Part of my mind registered relief at his not giving me the half-expected ‘Nothing Amme’ response. Then he looked up and I saw the misery in his eyes.
I fervently wished that the pain it gave me didn’t show on my face. Then he said slowly as if he was talking to himself ‘How I wish I could figure out a way out of this utter confusion.’
‘Over what son?’
‘Over the marriage business as a whole I suppose’ he said dully.
Though badly shaken inside, I put up a brave front by donning a no-nonsense attitude.
‘Well then, let us get to the bottom of your problem. Since you were not averse to getting married, I presume that the girl must be your problem. Right? ’
He looked up and said slowly ‘Yes, I think you are right in your presumption - Sally is my problem. You see Amma, she has always been our good old Thali, but now the issue of marriage has turned her into a total stranger to put it mildly.’
It was my turn to take time for digesting his words. Then I put in ‘Why don’t you call her up for a friendly chat Jo?’
‘That is the crux of the matter, Amme. As you know we have never had the habit of talking over the phone. If it were so, I could have got over my nagging worry by asking her outright whether she had consented to marry me out of a sense of filial duty.’
Suddenly I felt light-hearted. Patting his hand I said with firm conviction ‘Son, if that is what your worry is, you can safely take it from me that it is quite unnecessary.’
‘Jo, in this time and day options are endless when it comes to communication, you know, like text, email, chat, orkut, facebook or whatever. If you want, I can ask Thali to talk to you. What do you say?’
‘Oh no, no, no - there is no need to involve Thali if you are sure about it. May God’s grace be with us when we meet each other in Church on the 26th. ’
‘Gosh Amma, I thought you were clueless when it came to online options. I am impressed.’ Jo couldn’t help smiling as I left.
Avarachan had announced that soon after breakfast the next day we would have to go out for inviting our near relatives and close friends in person. Susymama topped the list and we also finished a few other houses en route. The visits took longer than we had bargained for as a result I had to hurry a lot to get dinner ready in time. 
During dinner Avarachan regaled Jo about our trip and Jo appeared to be enjoying his description. But as soon as Avarachan finished and settled in front of the TV for his nightly news intake Jo came to me and said ‘I want to take Sally to meet my Mizoram relatives. In fact, I have already made reservations on the Guwahati Express Train starting at 2 AM on the 27th. We would halt at Guwahati for two to three days and then move on to Mizoram for another two to three days’ stay with Thomas Appachan and family. I am leaving a buffer of two days for some off-the-cuff sightseeing’
‘That is the day after the wedding?’
‘Yes, Amme.’
The expression on my face might have perplexed Jo for he hastily spoke up ‘Please Amme, don’t object to my plan. But of course, if Sally doesn’t relish the idea I will have to drop it. Will you please ask Sally to pack some woolens?’
I quickly recovered my poise ‘What a splendid idea Mone!’ I enthused. That is just the break you need.’ Jo was obviously relieved to hear my comment.
‘Amme, please try to know if Sally is agreeable tonight itself because if she is not I can cancel the booking immediately.’
‘Yes, I shall call Bindu right away.’ 
I got up to clear the table. I decided to do the dishes after calling Bindu. During the past month, Bindu and I had called each other several times to discuss the various arrangements pertaining to the wedding but both of us had shied from talking about our children and their attitudes.
During the call I intended to keep my voice as soft as possible so as not to attract Avarachan’s attention. I would tell him later when we went to bed but not now when it was still an uncertain thing. Also it would be best if I trod the delicate ground gingerly I warned myself.
When I heard a mumbled ‘Hello’ at the other end I began, ‘Hi Bindu’.
‘It is me Tharaunty, I will call Amma’ came Sally’s voice. 
‘Hold on Thali - How about a trip to Assam and then on to Jo’s home state of Mizoram for two weeks? Jo has already made the booking. The train leaves in the wee hours of the 27th you see. Jo has asked me to tell you to bring some woolens with you dear.’ Oh God! What did I blurt out? Wasn’t my role limited to finding out if Thali was interested? When did I become a tour promoter? I just stared at the mouthpiece aghast, my heart thud-thudding.
‘Thara, hold the receiver, if you want to hear her’ Avarachan’s words jolted me into action.
‘Are you there Tharaunty?’ Sally was asking.
‘Yes, Thali, I’m listening’ I said weakly drained of all excitement. 
‘OK, I will bring them Tharaunty’ she said.
‘Very good my dear, good night’ I said.
Scarcely had I put down the receiver, when Avarachan was at my side and holding my shoulder turned me towards him and asked ‘What is going on? Tell me girl.’
‘Just a minute. Let me tell Jo first.’
‘Jo dear, Sally said that’s OK with her’ I told him through the half-open door and went back to the kitchen. Avarachan was waiting for me by the dining table and after hearing the details commented ‘Perhaps we were all a bit hasty to assume that a brother-sister relationship could be maneuvered into that of a husband-wife in no time.’
‘I think you have a point there, Aacha’ I agreed.
During breakfast the next day, I heard Avarachan telling Jo that it was splendid decision to go and visit his Mizoram relatives. I was relieved to hear the happy note in Jo’s voice as he and Avarachan discussed the various ‘must-see’ spots. As the discussion moved to the wildlife territory I found myself wondering how Sally was faring.
Our Thali of old would be bubbling with excitement over a proposed journey to some scenic spots I knew for sure. But the reactions of this reticent avatar, I couldn’t fathom at all. As the morning hours wore on I had the uneasy feeling that Sally may not have told Bindu about the trip even. I decided to call up Bindu and check. My hunch was proved right. Bindu was unaware that I had called Sally.
‘I must have been in the shower when you called her Sarachemme’ Bindu said.
When I told her why I had called Sally Bindu exclaimed ‘That explains why she wanted to borrow my sweater and shawl.’
‘How is she, Bindu? I hope she is not moody or depressed, is she?’
‘Depressed she definitely is not Saracheme. But as for moodiness, she seldom talks about the wedding and no mention of Johnny passes her lips. Otherwise her behavior is quite as normal. Still to be honest, yesterday when I saw her taking a few wedding cards for mailing to her friends I took a long deep breath, Sarachemme. It felt so good that I spent five full minutes taking just deep breaths.’
‘I know what you mean Bindu, let us just take it as ‘so far so good’. Have you purchased the wedding saree and all?’ I asked mainly to switch the conversation over to a more pleasant topic.
‘Yes we did, and we hope to get the blouses also ready by the weekend. Tomorrow we are going to buy the wedding ring. Sally’s preference is for a plain band. What about Johnny? Has he bought the ring?’
‘Day after tomorrow, Susymama’s younger grandson Jimmy is coming over to accompany Jo for the necessary purchases.’
‘That is good. Next week, Alex will be coming and Pinky and family are expected to arrive a week before the wedding. Probably we will reach there only four or five days earlier because when Mummy is the event manager we can safely assume the role of guests.’
‘Oh Yes, that is true’ I agreed laughingly.
While I resumed my chores in the kitchen what Bindu said about Sally went round and round in my brain with the result that I was none the wiser for having phoned Bindu for getting news about her. 
‘Stop being a silly goose’ I chided myself and concentrated on preparing dinner.
On Saturday, soon after breakfast Jimmy arrived and the boys went by Jo’s motorbike for buying the wedding ring etc. Shortly afterwards, Avarachan and I also left for purchasing the customary gifts to be given by the groom to his immediate relatives and household helpers. I had earlier made out a list of recipients starting with Anna Chedathy and ending with Alice Kochamma. Avarachan had earlier decreed that a ‘Kasavu Mundu’ would be ideal for Achayan. Selecting suitable sarees for the womenfolk was a time-consuming procedure and finally when we reached home with our heavy load it was past our usual lunch time. As Jo would be treating Jimmy to lunch we ordered take-out for our lunch. 
Avarachan had urged me to buy a grand ‘mother-in-law’ saree but I told him the one I had worn for Jimmy’s brother’s wedding would suit me fine. However I made him buy a shirt for the occasion. I intended to ask Jimmy to take his parent’s gift to them. Avarachan had retired to our room for a short nap and I took to clearing the kitchen. Sometimes this unexciting chore gets my brain to settle down and this was one such time. Hardly was I done when the boys returned carrying quite a few parcels. 
Jimmy was bubbling with enthusiasm and called me to view their purchases. Jo’s air of diffidence didn’t surprise me since he seldom got carried away by excitement. But when I sensed a slight nervousness in his behavior, it intrigued me though I did not comment on it. Jimmy opened the parcels one by one with a flourish and showed me the shirts Jo had purchased for Avarachan, himself, and to my utter amazement and delight, the ones he had bought for his uncle and cousin who were coming from Assam for the wedding.
‘Oh! Mone, I am so thrilled that you thought about then’ I said overwhelmed by the gesture.
‘Sarammachy check out this cool shirt Jocha got me. You gotta love this shade of red.’
‘Sarammachy, this packet is your sari. I will open it and show you. We went through a lot of selections before Jocha settled on this one. It was I who told the salesgirl that you were a slim beauty. It is the latest and the greatest’ Jimmy said selecting a packet. Jimmy’s genuine excitement was so refreshing that I didn’t have the strength to say ‘you shouldn’t have’ to him. To my immense relief it was not one of those heavy silk thingy. Texture-wise it was closest to silky-kota. It was a peculiar shade of burnt orange with intricate cutworks of purple and gold feathers of various sizes and a good measure of bling thrown in. 
‘Aha! Now our ‘slim beauty’ has no choice but to wear a new sari in the latest and greatest design’ drawled Avarachan’s voice from the doorway. The unconcealed glee in his voice sat well with Jimmy who hi-fived him in delight.
‘Sarammachy, there is more’ Jimmy said cryptically. 
‘Why can’t you enjoy silence for a while kid?’ asked Jo with mock irritation while a slow flush crept up his face. He then took out a small packet from his pocket and gave it to me. 
‘Sarammachy, it is for you’ Jimmy said happily. It was as though Jimmy was dubbing for Jo.
My fingers trembled slightly as I fumbled with the simple catch. Jimmy’s eager fingers shot out and opened it. Oh! God what an exquisite pair of earrings - a miniature bunch of grapes of pearl set in gold! My ever active tear ducts were threatening to soak the pearls when Jimmy burst out. ‘Hold on Sarammachy. Another surprise is on the way’ and ran for cover behind the sofa. 
His words had the desired effect. I clicked shut the small casket and expectantly looked at Jo whose face had turned crimson. Evidently, he had no clue as to how to appear cool and composed. He delved his hand in his pocket and taking out a similar packet gave it to me without a word.
‘Sarammachy, it is a gift for Sally. I forgot you are not good with these boxes. Staring at it won’t open it. Here let me handle it for you’ said Jimmy appearing at my side like a magician’s sidekick.
Jimmy’s words spurred me into action. Lo! A tiny round earring with different colored stones sat on its velvet bed.
‘What do you see Sarammachy?’.
I looked again and saw the shape of a multi-colored fish. 
‘Goodness! How beautiful it is!’ I exclaimed and looked at Jo.
Jo turned to Jimmy and said ‘Jimmy you have the floor’ and plopped down on the settee, with a glint of amusement in his eyes. Jo’s steady gaze seemed to disconcert Jimmy initially. But he soon overcame it with a laugh.
‘Well Sarammachy there is not much to tell really. When we were at the jeweller’s to buy the wedding ring two elderly women were at the next table choosing earrings. Our purchase was quickly done and Johnny went to settle the bill. One of the ladies was holding the pearl grapes in her hands and they finally decided against it as it was outside their budget. While the sales girl was replacing it on the display stand, the tiny fish earring caught my eye. Unlike you I saw the fish immediately. I invited Johnny’s attention to it. But he seemed more interested in the pearl grapes and decided to buy it for you.  Then I asked him to buy the cute little thing as my gift to Sally dear. When I get a job I’ll cough up. They are not rhinestones - they are the real deal with sapphire, ruby, diamond and one more like that. So I will be coughing up big then.’
‘That is OK Jimmy dear’ I said quickly ‘whether you ‘cough’ up or not, it is indeed your gift. After all it is the thought that counts.’ Jimmy’s face cleared and an impish grin appeared.
‘After all, Sally is Jocha’s cousin too so it won’t hurt him too much to buy a chic wedding present for her, isn’t it Sarammachy?’
To my relief Johnny burst out laughing ‘Man! You are priceless Jimmy.’
Jimmy left soon after tea. The boy’s visit was a pleasant interlude in the somewhat stuffy atmosphere prevailing at home. I purposely didn’t ask about the wedding ring. Let Avarachan deal with it, I decided. Had the bride been anyone else, there would have been a lot of discussions and decisions to be taken and conveyed between the two families. As somebody had humorously remarked this was indeed a wedding within the family. And barring our two families and of course Elia Kochamma, every one of our invitees naturally assumed that it was a love-match. What an irony! I sighed.
Sunday evening Avarachan and I went to invite Anna Chedathy’s family and that of Elia Kochamma’s and also to give them their gifts. Though now-a-days she hardly moved out of the house Anna Chedathy declared that she wouldn’t for the world miss her Johnny Mon’s wedding with dear Sally Mol. Elia Kochamma assured that ther entire family would attend the wedding and her reassuring words lifted me up mentally. On the way back we called on Achayan and Alice Kochamma to give their presents which they accepted gladly. Achayan’s unexpected query ‘Alice, whose side are we on - the bride’s or the groom’s?’ was so hilarious that we all laughed in genuine merriment.
Avarachan and Achayan went to the veranda to discuss the various arrangements. Alice Kochamma told me that their son, Regi and family would be coming that weekend and that she had made arrangements for an additional helper in the kitchen. ‘You see Sarakutty, my family being a large one I am expecting a crowd for breakfast.’ Then she added as an afterthought, ‘Really it is such a relief that nowadays only our own children and their families would be there as staying guests. In our days, it was the usual custom for all family members and their families to come at least two or three days ahead, presumably to help out with the preparations. Are your sisters and families coming Sarakutty?’
‘Both my sisters are pretty old for taking such a long journey. So there is little chance of their making it, I think. Anyway Johnny’s Uncle and his son are coming for the wedding. They will probably be here for two or three days. So we do have family coming for a short stay.’ 
‘I see’ said Alice Kochamma in a lackluster voice.
‘After Anna Chedathy retired, have you a daily help or somebody Sarakutty?’ I felt that the question was more of a suggestion.
‘Yes, I do have a young girl coming thrice a week for two hours in the morning. For the wedding week she has agreed to work extra hours, and Anna Chedathy’s daughter Susan is also coming that week and I believe that should suffice.’
Because I had a feeling that more suggestions which I might not appreciate were in the offing, I got up saying ‘I have to fry fish for dinner. I’d better leave ahead of Avarachan’ and quit the place pronto. 
But while frying the fish, my mind uneasily dwelt on the subtle hints Alice Kochamma had dropped. To me Sally was simply our own Thali who had always been an inseparable part of our life and as such needed no special or formal treatment. Yet Alice Kochamma’s query had succeeded in impinging on my mind the change in our status from family to that of in-laws and that made me a little sad. ‘I may not be her mother, but she will forever remain my daughter and not daughter-in-law’ I told myself resolutely and felt the better for it.
Monday dawned and we were suddenly plunged into a flurry of activity and excitement. Alex had stopped by on Sunday night so had Achayan’s son Regi and family. Regi and Betty paid us a courtesy visit in the evening after Jo had returned from office. Even though they visited their parents every other year, I didn’t think they had ever met the grown up Jo. Hence I couldn’t help being a little apprehensive over their impression of Jo. But seeing the ‘cool’ ease with which Jo interacted with them and the gleam of admiration in their eyes, my heart almost burst with pride. They conveyed that Bindu, Pinky and family and Sally would be coming on Tuesday.
After they left, feeling happy and contented I stepped to my side veranda to muse over their visit. Hence I was quite taken aback when Jo followed me there and asked timidly ‘Amme, my nervousness didn’t show, did it?’
‘What do you mean Jo? You were confidence personified and they were highly impressed, I am sure. After all they were just Sally’s uncle and aunt - no strangers’ I said emphatically, looking him straight in the eye. I went back to the living room and took the tea things to the kitchen
Jo averted his gaze and sitting on the kitchen stool said slowly ‘I don’t know whether you can empathize with my feelings, Amme. When I was a kid and later in my teens even, the only person I could interact on equal footing was Thali that is apart from our own cozy family. It is indeed a blessing that I secured this job after my Engineering degree - it allowed me to emerge out of my shell. Then came around the chance to go abroad for training which boosted my self-confidence no end. Now I have no problem, none whatsoever, when it comes to dealing colleagues, other acquaintances and even strangers. In fact, I feel that members such as Appachan, Ammachy, Susy Ammachy and all others whom we often meet have come to accept me as part of family. But to Regi Uncle and Betty Aunty, I may very well be the strange kid whom you chose to adopt out of kindness.’
Even though the dejected tone that had crept into his voice when he came to the last part smote my heart I vehemently protested ‘Hey hey Johnny, don’t wallow in self-pity. It doesn’t suit you at all, you know. Tell me, do you think Sally would care tuppence for Regi or his wife’s opinion? Also tell me do you have the time and energy to deal with such nonsense? I know I don’t.’
Suddenly Jo turned towards me his eyes alight with wonder and said ‘What an ego booster you are Amme! It is a pity you missed your true vocation.’ 
‘Never mind that Johnny, I have heard of pre-wedding nerves, but I always thought that only women suffered from it. Now you scoot, I have to finish those dishes in the kitchen and then make some calls.’
‘OK, OK, goodnight Amme.’
The new curtains arrived on Tuesday and I was busy for almost the whole day hanging them and making minor adjustments here and there. The color scheme of the rooms and the new curtains complemented each other so well that even Avarachan who seldom noticed such niceties was moved to exclaim ‘Wow’. We had ordered for a new double bed and a new wall cupboard for Jo’s room which would be delivered only after the bride and groom left for their trip. Thank God! I didn’t feel I was up to coordinating any more upholstery items. 
Jo planned to work through Tuesday. His uncle and cousin were expected to arrive on Wednesday morning. He intended to take them for a quick trip around the city. 
On Tuesday evening, Jo and Avarachan went to the Parish Hall where the wedding reception was to be held. Syamala and I were busy in the kitchen getting ready for receiving Jo’s uncle and cousin the next day. We went over the wedding day breakfast plans again for the umpteenth time. Wedding day breakfast was a traditional affair for us - we had to provide the traditional Appam and chicken curry to whoever turned up. A few of my cousins and my friend Razia (who extended her trip by a week for this very occasion) were expected and I had specially invited Susymama and family. Jimmy, whose company Jo rather enjoyed, had promoted himself to the role of best man. As Syamala had agreed to stay on Friday night, we had no qualms about serving a good breakfast on Saturday morning.
As I was shaping the cutlets my mind was uneasily dwelling on the expected arrival of Sally and her family around 4 o’clock in the evening. Avarachan would be going up to Achayan’s in the evening at some point to meet them I felt sure, but I couldn’t decide whether to accompany him or not. Last night over dinner, Avarachan had mentioned the time of their arrival which might have prompted Jo to go to his hairdressers during the evening hours. By the time he had returned, Alex and Bindu had paid us a visit and gone. I could see the relief on his face when Avarachan regretfully informed him of their visit. I had asked Bindu privately about Sally but her candid reply did little to lessen my nervousness.
‘Honestly Sarachemme, I don’t know what to make of her behavior. To all outsiders including Daddy and Mummy she is quite pleasant and apparently happy to go along with all the attendant preparations of the wedding. But when we are alone she appears moody and a little distracted. Alex tells me not to worry but wait patiently till the knot is tied. So I am leaving it at that’ Bindu had said with a sigh.
After dinner, I went to the guest room to get it ready for Jo’s uncle and cousin. Jo followed me and helped me make the beds. I knew he wanted to know about Sally, but I didn’t feel like talking and so we finished the job in near silence. As I turned to leave he suddenly caught hold of my hand and asked ‘Amme, how is Sally?’
I slowly turned my head towards him and said ‘As I haven’t seen her, I can’t answer your query.’ Then as an afterthought I went on ‘Tell you what - tomorrow when your uncle and cousin come they would certainly want to meet her. You could tag along and see for yourself you know.’
There was a moment’s silence, and then he said softly ‘I would rather not Amme’ and went to his room, while I shook my head in exasperation over the children’s behavior. 
The morning dawned fine and clear. I had got up earlier than usual and had prepared breakfast. Avarachan and Jo had gone to the airport for collecting the guests. Avarachan had arranged their journey by air to save time and energy and had also arranged a taxi for them to visit their relatives in their native place which they intended to do before the wedding. Even though, Avarachan had maintained contact by calling them up during Christmas, Easter and Onam holidays, we hadn’t met them since we left with little Jo all those years ago. 
Somehow their impending visit caused a flutter of panic in my stomach, so I sought solace in the side veranda - my haven of peace and tranquility. In no time, I felt composed, watching the bees, the butterflies, and the humming birds all vying with each other to collect honey from the colorful blooms. The bigger birds were mostly for the worms and the seeds. I stayed on till I heard the sound of the car stopping at the gate. I quickly opened the front door and walked to the car as a gesture of warm welcome. The boot was open and Jo and his cousin Suraj were taking care of the luggage. Avarachan and Thomaskutty were talking and walking along the short pavement when the latter suddenly lifted his face and saw me. 
‘Hey! Look who is here!’ he exclaimed, his face beamed in a wide smile. 
‘Oh God! What a striking resemblance to Jo’ I thought as I returned the smile and gave him a welcome hug. 
After freshening up Avarachan took father and son to Achayan’s. They appeared a little surprised that Jo was not accompanying them though they did not make any comment. I was spared the anxiety over their meeting with Sally by the timely arrival of Syamala, who had quite a reputation for being a chatterbox. However, when about an hour later, I saw them returning accompanied by Alex, my heart lurched within me making me utterly clueless for handling the situation. My blank stare was fixed on Jo whose face had paled on seeing Alex. 
‘Come on son! Shake hands with your future father-in-law’ boomed Avarachan cheerfully. 
Alex shook Jo’s outstretched hand and gently asked ‘How are you son? Your train starts slightly after midnight on 26th right?’
‘Yes, technically speaking it is 2:00 AM on the 27th. We will have to leave here by 12:45 at the latest. I hope Sally has packed her things for the trip’ said Jo easily. He had evidently regained his composure. 
‘You need not worry a thing about the children, Alex,’ beamed Jo’s uncle. ‘My elder son would be receiving them at the station and taking them to stay with his family. He is now working in Guwahati you know.’
‘Oh! That is very good’ said Alex with a note of relief in his voice. Soon Alex took his leave and Jo took the guests for a trip round the city.
I could hardly wait for Avarachan to walk back after closing the gate.
‘Aacha’ I called anxiously as soon as he came within earshot. 
A quick glance at my face and he put his hand on my shoulder and gently led me to the side veranda ‘Sit down and relax, girl. You see, I had briefed Thomaskutty and Suraj as we were walking along to Achayan’s about how the marriage proposal was most unexpectedly made by Alex and how shocked the children were to hear about it at first. I also informed that even though they have eventually agreed to it, they haven’t yet talked it over or even seen each other.
‘How did they take it Aacha?’ I couldn’t help asking.
He gave a short laugh ‘To be sure like everyone else around here they too were under the impression that it is a love match!’
‘Such a nice forethought, Aacha’ I said admiringly. ‘How did Thali receive them?’
In answer he gave a low chuckle and said ‘Our girl is a little minx, Thara. I had expected nothing more than a cold but polite reception from her. But to my utter amazement and delight her most charming behavior was on display which I really think even her parents found hard to take in. Alex and Bindu were ready with their ‘small talk’ but Thali did not give them a chance even. God! She did me proud.’
‘Thank God’ I sighed happily.
‘By the way Thara, tomorrow, that is Thursday, we are taking our guests to visit some relatives of theirs. We will leave very early. You see, one of Thomaskutty’s cousins is holding a breakfast get-together at his place for our convenience. That way we can be back for a late lunch. I will need some invitation cards too for Thomaskutty to give. I am sure in the evening we will have to expect some friends who would want to drop by you know.’
‘I know and I am ready with refreshments. Anna Chedathy’s daughter Susan is coming to help out.
‘That is good’ Avarachan commented.
On Thursday Susan, Syamala and I were busy in the kitchen. As we were in the pre-wedding day spirits the task of getting lunch ready, stocking up for next day’s lunch and dinner, preparing the crockery and cutlery etc. had a happy lilt to it. By the time Avarachan and Jo returned with our guests, which was only a little past our usual lunch time, the cooking preparations were almost over. When I heard the car stopping at the gate I hurried down to open the gate. Jo got to the gate before me and he gave a cheerful ‘Thank you Amma’. His cheer was so unexpected that I looked at him in wonder. His familiar, happy smile indicated that he wanted to tell me something. Suddenly wisdom dawned on me, lifting my spirits in its wake. But there was no time to talk. I silently thanked Jo’s uncle and cousin for taking the time and energy to be with us.
The rest of the day went by in typical Kerala style. Thomaskutty went to rest awhile after lunch. Avarachan, Jo and Suraj headed out to the reception hall to meet the team entrusted with the job of decorating the church and the hall. As soon as they returned we had our tea. The tea things barely got time to reach the kitchen when Elia Kochamma and Aby came. Jo came forward to meet her, bent down and kissed her cheek. She had a small packet with her which she gave Jo and said softly ‘May god bless you darlings, in everything. Son, remember to read at least five verses from the book of ‘Proverbs’ daily. When you get time, do come and visit us.’
‘Thank you Ammachy. We will certainly do both’ Jo said.
After they left there were few other visitors and among them were Nancy and her husband, and Anila and her James.
Friday flew past in a whirl. Soon after breakfast my friend Razia came by with a tote-bag. I heard her tell Avarachan that today was the day when I would need her support. Avarachan grunted he was sure that Sara had all the support she needed. Razia wisely ignored him. She had her agenda, for in minutes she was in the side garden snipping away at blooms and branches and leaves. She took whatever empty bottles and useless jars I had in the back of the store room and set to work.  From her tote-bag came an array of evergreens and candles. Soon flower sprigs were popping out of various corners and before you knew it the house took on a festive look. I particularly noticed how she had a ‘konna’ branch with two ‘rajamali’ flowers floating from a ceramic ashtray. A close friend of mine had picked up the ashtray while she was in France. Since no one smoked in our house, all these years it had served as a lowly paper weight. Now who would have recognized it as it stood royally as the centerpiece in the coffee table!
From morning onwards there were a lot of comings and goings, somebody or other always asking for something or offering advice all amidst Avarachan’s ongoing instructions to whoever happened to be within earshot. Razia took the full brunt of it in style. In spite of everything, I caught myself giggling a couple of times over the look on Avarachan’s face as he retreated after giving Razia his time-sensitive instructions. I absentmindedly noticed an argument she was having with Avarachan and her smug face indicating who the victor of that round was. 
All too soon, it was evening and a steady stream of vistors poured in. It was quite some time later that I realized we had festival lights over our front bushes and side-veranda. Icicle lights plaited the tree branch in the front. Razia smiled in satisfaction when I finally registered it (that was the argument she had with Avarachan). The candles with their soft lights made their statement in style. A few of Jo’s colleagues and Avarachan’s friends turned up with their families. Meeting strangers and entertaining them with small talk was not exactly my forte but I managed fairly well as Avarachan later told me. Here too Razia’s inimitable charm came into play. Effortlessly she shepherded the visitors back and forth, whenever my steam ran out. 
Dinner was a hasty affair - for one it was already late and two the menfolk had the customary task of teaching the groom how to tie the knot with the thread taken out of the ‘Manthrakodi’ which had been delivered from Achayan’s in the morning. Jo’s uncle was entrusted with the task of keeping the ‘manthrakodi’ with the ‘minnu’ and the wedding ring and presenting it at the church the next day. Jimmy would come in the morning for helping Jo to get ready and the vicar was expected for prayer at 10 o’clock which meant breakfast needed to be over at least forty-five minutes earlier so that I could get ready in time. 
During the whole day I hadn’t got a chance to have a word with Jo. So it gladdened my heart when Avarachan called us all for our evening prayer even though it was real late. Avarachan and the guests were sitting and talking and Jo was standing by the phone stand when I went in. I sat down on the sofa and then Jo came and sat beside me holding my hand. The simple action made my eyes mist over and I kept my eyes bowed as Avarachan read the Bible. Thomaskutty led the prayer. When finished the guests retired to their room and then Jo turned, put his hand on the side of my head and kissed me on the forehead. I couldn’t control the quivering of my lips, nor the silent flow of tears down my cheek. I softly kissed his cheek while Avarachan looked on. Jo then went up to Avarachan and embraced him and kissed him. 
‘Now, now! What is going on?’ Avarachan tried to be brusque but failed miserably and ended up holding him tightly, patting his back. Jo said a muffled ‘Good night’ and went to his room. Avarachan turned and switched on the TV and I went to the kitchen for winding up the day’s activities and settling Syamala for her stay-over. Razia had given us precise instructions how to rearrange the furniture in the living and dining area after dinner so as to get the maximum space possible to accommodate all. We quickly did all that. Our plan was to wake up at 4:30 AM to be ready for serving breakfast from seven onwards if necessary. I hadn’t expected to fall asleep as quickly as I did but as a matter of fact I went out like a light and slept so well that when the alarm woke me up I got up quite refreshed, ready to meet the big day of our life.
The photo-shoot team arrived at the crack of dawn. Almost immediately they started taping the garden and the interiors for use as fillers within the album. Normally the lights and the wires would have driven me up the wall but today I was past all that.
Susymama and her family were the first to arrive. Razia arrived a minute later. At her insistence, we all had our breakfast immediately so that Jimmy and Jo could retire to their room for getting ready. As Susymama and Thampychayan were leaving to Achayan’s a few other guests who were cousins and relatives turned up. At 9:00 Razia firmly edged me out and I could hear her announcing in her lazy drawl that latecomers, if any, could help themselves from the items laid out on the dining table.
The vicar arrived at the dot of 10 accompanied by Achayan and Alice Kochamma. Elia Kochamma and her family had arrived a few minutes earlier. Jo then gave the customary ‘Dakshina’ to Achayan, his Thomas Uncle and Elia Kochamma, who put their hands over his head and blessed him.A mat was then spread on the floor and Achen and Jo stood on it facing each other. A hymn was sung and Achen prayed for a happy and blessed married life for the children both of whom were well-known to him. Achayan and Alice Kochamma left and soon after we all left for church, a short distance which took barely ten minutes by car. Jimmy sat in the front and Jo and I at the back. Our car was decorated with a large bouquet of flowers on its bonnet. Jo squeezed my hand lightly and smiled at me. 
‘You look fine, Mone’ I whispered.
‘Thank you Amma. You look lovely too’ he whispered back.
The church was decorated tastefully. Bride’s party was yet to arrive. We got out of the car and stood waiting at the porch. Jo had his face turned towards the interior of the church. True to his nature Jimmy was doing a running commentary. Even when Jimmy excitedly announced that Sally and her parents were alighting from their car, Jo didn’t turn to look. I could have gone up to them and hailed Sally. But like Jo, I too didn’t or rather couldn’t. Presently Avarachan joined us and we escorted Jo to the front where two chairs were kept side by side for the groom and bride. We took our seats on the front pew. Suddenly a hush came over the congregation and as if on cue everyone turned their heads to watch the bridal group entering. My eyes were riveted on the vision of loveliness walking gracefully flanked by her parents, with her father holding her hand. 
As the party came nearer, her gaze alighted on me ‘My God! What a happy smile’ I exclaimed inwardly too bemused to reciprocate. But in that split second my mental block was knocked out and I took hold of her hand and gently pressed it. I felt as if the whole world was smiling benignly at me. Sally sat down by Jo’s side. Still he didn’t turn his face to look at her. Achen asked them to sign the marriage register which they did without casting a sideways glance. Then the service began and towards the end Achen joined their hands and read the gospel portion. It was then the time to tie the knot, which Jo did with ease and then covered Sally’s head with the ‘Mantrakodi’ and the ceremony was over. Nancy’s daughter Rinu was the bridesmaid who folded the ‘Mantrakodi’ and draped it over Sally’s left hand. 
The couple and the congregation came out of the church and then the photographers got busy with taking photos of mainly family members with the bride and groom. Then Jo invited his colleagues and friends to pose with them which they did with obvious pleasure. I could hear an elderly person telling Sally ‘Young lady, count yourself lucky that you got him’ to which another drawled ‘I reckon the luck factor could be divided equally between them’, amidst laughter and railleries of Jo’s friends. Though Sally played the role of a coy bride beautifully down to a T, my discerning eye could easily pick out the air of reticence lying between them.
‘Thank God, no one else will suspect anything’ I thought with relief.
The reception went very well with everyone complimenting us on the food and arrangements. Very many people, especially Alice Kochamma’s and Alex’s relatives and friends went up to the stage to meet the couple. From the pleased expression of Alice Kochamma, I could gather that they were all favorably impressed with the match.
Then I saw Jo taking Sally to meet his ‘boys’ and Achen and Kochamma occupying several tables at one side of the hall. I found myself holding my breath watching the interaction between Sally and them. Taking Sally’s hand, Achen seemed to be introducing her and on her part she stole the show by stooping down and hugging the youngest kid.
Around 3 ‘o’ clock we were able to leave the hall - within half an hour, the traditional ‘Kacha Koduppu’ (the bride’s mother gifts the groom an ornamental gold ring and the groom reciprocates with a silk saree in the presence of close relatives of the couple) was to be conducted in our place. It was also an occasion for the relatives to see the groom’s house.
In her easy manner, Razia had said that she would take care of its organizing. I brooked no resistance for I could not fathom beyond the church function. Moreover Anna Chedathy and her daughter were also helping out. 
Again Razia was in her element. The house was all spruced up and had ‘Welcome’ written all over it. It had a taken on a polished look that was usually missing in most of our ‘Kachakoduppu functions. Then I realized it was the absence of all the chairs we had rented for the function. Razia smiled at me and tilted her head in the direction of the garden. To everyone’s delight she had made the ‘Kachakoduppu’ a garden affair. The refreshments were served out of the veranda. 
Normally, the whole procedure didn’t take long, but here, everybody being everybody else’s relative nobody seemed particularly in any hurry to depart. Only Jo’s uncle and cousin, left as soon as the ceremony was over. Because it was a garden event the children happily ran around. Their parents relaxed without having to worry about them bumping into objects and doing the damage they are capable of doing.  After much tarrying over tea, finally the relatives left one by one. Only Alex, Bindu, Pinky and children remained. As per custom, the newly-weds were to spend the next three days at the bride’s residence , which in this case was not possible as they had to leave on their journey after midnight.
The caterers had dropped off the excess food and there was sufficient quantity to last for two days at the least, so I offered to share it with Achayan. Alice Kochamma gladly accepted saying that it would give them a respite after the din and bustle of the last few days. I sensed the sparkle was draining out of Sally’s face when she suddenly said ‘Saraunty, shall I go home and get out of this outfit?’
To avoid a controversy over the propriety of the action, I hastily said ‘Certainly dear.’
I cast a meaningful glance at Bindu, who took the cue and said ‘Johnny, you also come along with us. Saraunty, you two come and join us for dinner, even though it is provided by you’ she said with a laugh.
‘Please Bindumama, I would rather take a shower and change too as Sally said’ said Jo.
‘In that case, we will take Sally with us and later you join us for dinner?’ Alex made a compromise.
‘Deal, Alex’ Avarachan settled the issue and they all moved out.
I couldn’t say if anyone else noticed, but there was an infinitesimal pause before Sally went along with the others. Jo hadn’t waited to see them off but had gone straight to his room.
‘We also need to shower and change, Thara’ said Avarachan.
Anna Chedathy and her daughter were done with the washing. Susan insisted on brooming up the place which she finished in a jiffy. Then they too left. 
The house suddenly felt deserted. The elation and the excitement of the past few hours had given way to an inexplicable despondency which I found hard to shake off. ‘Why, taking a hot shower as Avarachan said could be the right antidote’, I told myself.
It took us about an hour for getting ready to go to Achayans. Avarachan and Jo were leisurely, or so it appeared, talking to each other about the events of the day and calling each other’s attention to someone or other of their acquaintances who had come for the wedding. As I had expected, Jo was wearing his usual outdoors dress and apparently calm.
‘What is it Amma’ asked Jo curiously looking at the small jewelry box in my hand.
‘Just a chain for Sally for wearing her ‘minnu’ you know’
‘But Amme, You know it is not safe to wear gold ornaments while travelling’, Jo said quickly.
 ‘Don’t worry - it is too thin to attract anyone’s attention.’
‘Let’s go’ Avarachan said moving to the door.
As we walked along, I asked Jo ‘When we return, we can take Sally with us isn’t it?’
‘Yes, that is the idea’ he said.
Achayan and Alex were sitting in the veranda. Soon after the wedding Pinky and her husband Suresh had gone to visit the parents of a close friend, living a few miles away. They were expected back anytime now. Alex got up to receive us. He then turned to Achayan and suggested ‘Shall we go in?’
‘Oh! Yes’ Achayan said heartily and led the way. 
Their drawing cum dining room was a spacious L-shaped one and the menfolk settled in front of the TV, to watch an ongoing cricket test between India and England.
I joined Alice Kochamma and Bindu who were setting the table and supervising Pinky’s children, a boy and a girl eating dinner. I wondered where Sally was. Then I heard the guest room door open and there she stood wearing a much-worn churidar, her hair still damp and glistening. 
When her gaze alighted on me she quickly cast a glance towards the front. Jo and the others were engrossed in the match and Alice Kochamma and Bindu were engaged in taking out crockery from the cupboard.
Sally quickly came to me and asked softly ‘What am I supposed to do with this, Saraunty?’ touching the damp thread around the neck holding the ‘minnu’.
The perplexity in her face amused me and I said lightly ‘Merry Christmas Sally! I have brought a chain for the ‘Minnu’, see this’ I held the box out to her.
‘What a quaint little chain, look at all these multi-colored tiny pearl-like things. Where did you buy it from Saraunty?’
‘Actually, I bought the original at a railway station in Andhra on our journey to Mizoram to collect Jo all those years ago. Our old goldsmith here put in a gold thread and the hook and the finishing touches required to hold the ‘minnu’ you see’ I said. 
‘Shall I call Jo to put it round your neck , Sally?’
‘No,no,no - we can handle it’ came the urgent response. ‘You help me Saraunty.’
She then proceeded to take out the ’minnu’ from the thread and tried to put it in the hook. But it seemed that the eye of the ‘minnu’ was not in alignment with the hook and the two of us labored a few futile minutes to fix it. We were so intent at the job that we didn’t see Jo coming towards us until he tapped my shoulder. Holding out Avarachan’s cellphone he said ‘Amma, a call for you from Australia Amachy.’
Jo would have immediately retreated had I not caught hold of his sleeve and asked him to help out. 
My sister wanted to hear about the wedding details. But I was neither in a position or mood to give her the titbits she particularly wanted to hear. So I ended the call telling her that I would call her in the morning. Even otherwise, more than half my attention was upon the timid couple - the girl silently placing the chain and ‘minnu’ on the table and the boy taking them up - both studiously avoiding eye-contact. I saw Jo trying to fix it as we had been doing but to no avail. Then he gave a slight twist to the hook and lo! It went in smoothly. 
He placed the chain back on the table and turned to leave but I told him ‘Wait Jo, fasten it around her neck, it is not long enough to slip over the head you know.’
Without a word, he took it up and standing behind Sally put it around her neck, fastened the clasp and walked away.
Sally didn’t turn immediately, so I went round to check on the chain. She had closed her eyes and an unshed tear was about to roll down her cheek. I was alarmed and instinctively clasped her to me.
‘I am so confused Saraunty’ came her muffled voice.
‘There, there, it is going to be alright dear’ I gently patted the side of her cheek.
‘Hi everybody we are back’ Pinky’s happy voice sailed through. 
I saw Pinky hugging Jo. Suresh gave him a hearty handshake. 
‘Come on everybody, dinner is served’ Alice Kochamma announced.
‘Finally! I was waiting for that call for quite some time. Get up everybody - chow time’ said Achayan leading the way.
‘Hey Alice! Is it a buffet dinner?’ asked Achayan rather surprised.
It was Bindu who answered. ‘Yes Daddy, we planned it so because we thought that our usual special dinners are too stiff and formal, lacking an air of liveliness.’
Whatever be the reason behind the buffet, I for one was most relieved at the arrangement. I did not have the mental strength to sit through a stiff meal. I had a feeling Sally and Jo felt the same way. As I had known Avarachan was the first to reach the side table and was generously coating the two beef cutlets on his plate with tomato sauce when the rest of the menfolk joined him. Achayan’s choice was plain chappathy with a special fish curry. I heard Jo telling Suresh that he was sticking to plain rice, dal and fried fish in view of their journey. I wondered if his casual remark was for cautioning Sally who was choosing food by my side.
‘Is that a motorbike stopping by our front?’ Everyone looked towards the front door. The doorbell rang and Alex went and opened the door.
Jimmy was standing there sheepishly smiling and holding out a brown envelope as if it explained why he was back at this late hour.
‘Hello Jimmy, come on in’ said Alex pleasantly.
‘Attention everybody’ announced Jimmy recovering his poise. ‘Yours truly is here to attend a job interview at the Town Hall tomorrow at 10 AM.’
‘That is great Jimmy’ said Jo.
‘High time you got a decent job my boy’ said Achayan indulgently. ‘Come on, let us get on with the dinner.’
A quick sideways glance at Alice Kochamma confirmed my hunch - she was utterly spent and weary. I could see she was fading fast.
‘Jimmy dear, you may stay with us and Avarachan can easily take you to the venue tomorrow’ I was quick on the uptake.
‘But wouldn’t you be busy with the newlyweds, Saraunty?’Jimmy asked.
‘Don’t worry over that, we would be leaving home around midnight you know’ said Jo.
‘Alright that is settled then. Actually Jocha, I was hoping to pick your brain a bit’ said Jimmy grabbing a plate and taking a generous helping of the mutton biriyani that was a leftover from the wedding reception.
I saw Sally settling beside Jimmy on the couch at the far end and I joined Jo and Avarachan at the dining table.
Dinner over, Avarachan suddenly looked at his watch and got up in a slight alarm. ‘Oh! My goodness 9:30! Let us make a move. I have to take the kids to the station in about two hours’ time you see.’
‘Well, I have to get the guest room ready for Jimmy. So let us go.’ I answered looking at everybody in general. 
Bindu caught my eye and said solemnly ‘Sarachamme, you may take the children with you. We will come over within an hour, I hope.’
Suresh came forward and taking Jo’s hands said ‘We are extremely tired after so much activity, so please excuse us for not coming to see you off.’
‘That is absolutely fine, goodbye’ Jo said easily.
Pinky gave Jo and Sally a peck on the cheeked and said ‘Goodnight’.
Jo went up to Achayan and Alice Kochamma, bent down, took their outstretched hands in his and kissed them. Sally had gone inside to get her baggage consisting of a rather large bag and a smaller one. She also went up to her grandparents and hugged and kissed them both. She then turned towards Pinky and told her to kiss the kids goodbye for her as both of them were sound asleep. Avarachan and Jo had already stepped down from the verandah and were briskly walking away talking lightly to each other. Out of the corner of my eye, I saw that Jo had unobtrusively taken up Sally’s large bag. Jimmy was to ride up to our place and offered to deliver Sally’s luggage. I kept Sally company during the short walk though neither of us uttered a single word. 
When we turned the corner, the sight of our dear old home all lighted up as if in warm welcome lifted up my spirits so much that I involuntarily exclaimed ‘There is no place like home, isn’t it Thali?’
In reply she just squeezed my hand lightly.
But the minute I stepped into the familiar surroundings my newfound elation evaporated and in its place a feeling of extreme uneasiness crept in. To cover it up, all I could do was to plunge into a flurry of activity. Somehow in the confines of our place the presence of Jo and Sally as a couple needed some getting used to, I felt. I tried my best to push the unwelcome feeling out of my mind by roping in Sally’s help to get the guest room ready for Jimmy. Till that evening Jo’s uncle and cousin had been occupying it. So Susan did not get time to get to it.
Sally was only too willing to help out. She took up a broom to sweep the floor while I quickly worked on the restroom. 
We could hear Jimmy’s bike and then heard a pleased ‘Wow!’ from him. 
He walked towards us and said ‘Saraunty, it is a shame that you are making the bride work like this.’
‘Do you fancy trading places?’ was Sally’s tart reply.
By the time I was done, Sally had changed bed sheets and pillowcases.
‘Saraunty, your living room looks ‘magical’ tonight’ said Jimmy suddenly. 
I laughed and then I too saw what made him say that. Razia while preparing the house for the ‘Kachakoduppu’ function had placed various night blooming flowerheads all over the place in little lids and small steel plates. And now all the 4 o’clock’s and jasmine flowers were in full bloom and we could smell their gentle fragrance. I suddenly realized that I did not have a single 4 o’clock in my yard. Razia had collected a dozen colors at least. Razia had also placed a small candle in each vase. Jimmy lit them all up in no time. I silently thanked her for her ‘magical’ touch and made a mental note to call her the next day. 
Before Alex and Bindu came, we had managed to make a reluctant Jimmy retire - he very much wanted to tarry till Jo-Sally left the scene. Avarachan’s ‘Go sleep tight boy, being sleepy-eyed at the interview won’t get you the job, you know’ delivered in his strict tones had the desired effect.
Jo went to his room and remained there until Alex and Bindu came and Avarachan’s rather loud ‘Come in, come in’ heralded their arrival.
I was in the kitchen preparing black coffee and Sally was putting cups on a tray. Bindu came straight to the kitchen while Alex settled with Avarachan in the front.
‘Hmm, what a nice aroma!’ Bindu said pouring the coffee into the cups. She took the tray to the dining room.
‘Come on Sally let us join them’ I said.
‘Tharaunty I want to fix my hair, it is quite dry now. Shall I use that room’ she said pointing to the box-room.
‘Of course, dear’ I said without thinking and then wondered ‘Should I have directed her to Jo’s room?’ Sally took her small bag and went in.
I saw that Jo hadn’t yet made his appearance. Then as if on cue, he came out wheeling his suitcase and left it near Sally’s.
‘Ah! Here he comes! I was wondering what was keeping you son. Come and drink you coffee. It is getting cold. I was sharing my Mizoram days with them son’ 
Jo acknowledged the presence of Alex and Bindu and sat down taking up his cup of coffee.
Alex asked about their tour plan which Jo was going to describe when suddenly Avarachan cut in jovially ‘Ask me Alex, I can give you whatever details you want much better than the boy. Now let me continue, yes, those were the days of insurgency and now I shudder to think that I ventured to take up a job there. But then I was a robust 24-25 year old plucky enough to brave any dire situation. No wonder there were few takers for a government job there. During the period of insurgency, many difficult and even tragic situations had to be faced. Somehow I held on even though some of my colleagues from different parts of the nation decided to call it a day and returned home.
Then Avarachan paused for a few seconds. A slow smile reminiscent of his ‘boyish’ one crept over his face and a low chuckle escaped him. ‘By then, the hills had weaved their charm over me. The Bengali overseer who shared my quarters used to wax lyrical when the lights from the cottages illuminated the hilly terrain at nightfall. In his eyes, they adorned the hills like a bejeweled necklace.’ 
Avarachan paused again and then continued in a matter-of-fact tone ‘You guys might find it hard to believe, but the fact is the Mizos were a cut above in their life-style and bearing to their counterparts in the other parts of the nation.’
‘In what way Avarachaya?’ Alex asked for all of us. Clearly Avarachan had our undivided attention.
‘Well, here is a simple example when I first landed there, I was sort of wonder-struck, seeing the majority of the folks (both men and women) being always neatly dressed and the women putting on lipstick, as a matter of course. In those days, you see, lipstick was not an easily available item in our local stores. That was clearly an indication of the influence of the early European missionaries.‘
Then he turned towards me and said ‘Thara, after the kids return home, let us go and revisit the hills, what do you say?’
Just then the clock struck half past eleven and Avarachan hastily got up and told Jo to put the luggage in the boot of his car and went to our bedroom. Alex had earlier volunteered to drop off Jo and Sally at the station. But Avarachan had declined the offer saying that he knew the route better and moreover, they had to catch an early morning flight to Chennai.
During Avarachan’s monologue, Sally had silently come in and sat beside Bindu on the settee. She had braided her hair into a tight plait.
I went to the dining room cupboard and took out the two packets of banana chips and Mavunda I had made.
‘Sally dear, have you room for these in your bag? I asked.
‘Yes, thank you Saraunty’ she said taking the packets from me. 
I saw Jo coming out of his room holding a white cover. Approaching Sally, he asked diffidently ‘Can you keep this in your handbag - tickets you know.’
She took it silently and put it in her handbag.
Alex and Bindu were standing side by side watching. It seemed to me that the air was suddenly filled with tension. I wished somebody would make some light comment to ease it. But somehow I could not bring myself to attempt it.
‘What is this - everybody so tense and uneasy? Come on Sweety! It is time you bid goodbye to your Appa - Amma. That goes for you too young man.’
That was Avarachan’s most welcome crack at gaiety. His words brought a smile to everybody’s face.
Then Alex said softly ‘Let us pray for the children’ and said a short prayer ending it with the Lord’s Prayer. Half way through my eyes had misted over. I didn’t dare to open them lest the tears kept in check should roll down. I smelled rather than saw Jo bending down and kissing my cheek. Without raising my head I took his hands and kissed them. 
I heard Bindu sniffle beside me which kept my eyes even more tightly shut. But they were jerked open on hearing a stifled sob. Sally was leaning against her father’s chest who was holding her in a loose embrace and patting her back. Then Bindu sprang to action. I saw her delving into her handbag and taking a small packet and going over to Sally. Tapping on the girl’s shoulder she said softly but firmly ‘Here Sally, take this - it is Daddy’s potpourri of pills and tablets for headache, cold, stomach upset etc. Sarachemme, this is an ultra-light version of what we had to carry around when we were young.’
Bindu’s timely action had the desired effect. Sally surreptitiously blew her nose and took the packet and put it in her handbag. It also spurred Avarachan to don his usual brisk no-nonsense attitude in no time. 
‘Come on kids, let us make the move. You can bid me goodbye at the station’ he boomed.
Avarachan had already reached the veranda ahead of us. By the time we descended the steps Jo had moved on as if by his action he was prompting Sally to follow suit which she was doing at a slower pace. Suddenly my feet felt leaden and I stayed put at the foot of his steps. Alex and Bindu had moved a little further but there they also stopped and watched the departing couple. 
Avarachan had already started the engine and waiting, I was sure, with his customary impatience. Jo was holding the back door open for Sally to get in and then shut it firmly and got into the passenger seat. Before moving out, Avarachan called out to Alex to not wait up for him and then they were gone. Both Jo and Sally had made an attempt at waving their hands. Bindu and Alex retraced the few steps and said that they would call after reaching Chennai and left closing the gate behind them. If they hadn’t shut the gate, I wouldn’t have bothered to do that because, all on a sudden I felt drained of all energy. Somehow I dragged myself in and after bolting the door went straight to our bedroom. Only force of habit made me sit up to read the short passage of Scripture and I was solid gone the moment my head hit the pillow.
The chirping of the birds on the guava tree woke me up and it was with wonder I heard Avarachan’s mild snoring beside me. I had no recollection of letting him in when he came back from the station. The word station thrust the thought of Jo and Sally so forcefully into my consciousness that I jumped out of bed to start the day’s routine. As my feet hit the ground I remembered Jimmy presence in the house.
All the while I was in the kitchen preparing breakfast; my ears were pricked up to hear the telephone ringing. As I was setting the table I could hear Avarachan and Jimmy moving around and getting ready. 
Avarachan was the first to put in his appearance. ‘Good morning sleepwalker’ he said and sat down to sip his coffee.
‘I hope the children had comfortable berths and slept well’ I ventured expecting him to elaborate.
‘I can’t comment on the sleep part, but this much I can say, they have nice company of a mother and her two kids all the way to Guwahati’ he said.
‘Ah! That is very good’ I agreed whole-heartedly.
Soon Jimmy joined us and all too quickly he left with Avarachan. I, on my part settled down to read the newspaper. It was then that Jo made that much awaited call.
‘Hello Amme, I hope you are up and about’ he said.
‘Oh yes! We have had our breakfast and Unki has left with Jimmy, you know. I hope you slept well son.’
‘We overslept because of yesterday’s din and bustle. We have as travelling companions one Leelaaunty, fortyish and her two smart kids. The elder boy is eight and the little girl two. They are returning after visiting her ailing grandmother. Her husband is an Engineer at ONGC and they have been in Guwahati for a few years now. They and Sally have gone to freshen up. Under the circumstances, their company is a godsend Amme’
‘How is Sally Mone? I mean, she is not moody or anything is she?’ I couldn’t help asking.
‘Don’t you worry about that Amma, I think chubby little Naomi has blown all her blues away. By the way we have just crossed the border. I think the retinue is coming back. I will call you when I find it convenient. Bye for now.’
‘Well so far so good’ I told myself.
When Avarachan returned the first thing he asked was ‘Did the boy call?’
I updated him with the latest and he replied ‘Ah! Well’. I thought his response had an element of anxiety in it.
Over lunch Avarachan told me that the cot and cabinets we had ordered for Jo’s room were being delivered in the evening. I had clean forgotten about the whole thing. The cabinets would be affixed the next day. 
That information spurred me into action. I inspected Jo’s room critically to decide which of the old things were to be retained. Jo had packed almost everything from the cabinets and his bookshelf into boxes before his trip. Jo’s single cot and the small cupboard had to make way for their modern counterparts. They were to be polished and put in the box-room. 
The only thing to be retained was the table he used since his school days. It was an antique rosewood piece that sat cozily under the side window. A picture of little Jo cocking his head as I tried to teach him some difficult problem flashed across my mind and I fondly reached for the small photo frame containing the picture of Jo with his parents the same one that Avarachan had showed me all those years ago. 
‘Uh-oh! What did you do?’ I chided myself for when I lifted the frame, the catch at the back came undone and the photo slid on to the table revealing another one underneath. My eyes got glued to the picture which Bindu had once taken, showing a complacent Avarachan with Jo on his lap and a timid looking me holding a six-month old Thali. Her toothless smile had an infectious quality and I found myself smiling back. What a chubby baby she was! One fat leg was thrown across Avarachan’s legs and Jo was holding her left hand. Baby Sally bore little resemblance to the slender girl she had become except for her sparkling jet black eyes. I carefully put back the photos within the frame. 
In the evening just before Avarachan went to his club, the furniture folks delivered the stuff and promised to be in at 9:00 the next day to fix everything up. Things are getting done I thought. 
I gave Elia Kochamma a ring and her soft, unhurried voice was the perfect medicine to relax my mind. The last thought on my mind as I slid into sleep was to get up early for Jo’s probable call. Actually it came earlier than I expected. His ‘Good morning’ had a pleasant ring of well- being to it that lifted my spirits. ‘How are you Mone?’
In answer, he gave a short laugh and said ‘Sally and party have gone for their morning ablutions and I have the coast clear for some time. You see, Leela aunty is a born talker, I mean it in the most pleasant manner Amme’ he added hastily. But under our particular circumstances, her non-stop chatter is most welcome as it engages Sally more or less fully. And Amme, it amuses me no end to see her taking pains to give an impression that we have been married for long. Of course, our knowing each other for almost our whole life comes to aid when she wants to mention an incident or so authentically.’
‘Then, don’t you talk to each other at all?’ the words were out before I could check.
‘Oh! Don’t get me wrong Amme, we do talk occasionally as becoming for a seasoned couple.’
He then gave a low chuckle and said ‘But it sure has its funny moments Amme, like when she makes a gaffe and becomes all flushed and confused.’
‘My poor darling’ I said.
‘Hey! Say ‘my poor Jo’ Amme, because yesterday I had to rescue the ‘damsel in distress’ twice. But then I can’t say I resent the trouble’ he said slowly. ‘You see when a rosy blush flushes her cheeks, our dear old Thali looks a picture. Bye for now’ he added hastily and switched off.
‘What are you doing Thara, smiling sweetly into the receiver? Is that Thali at the other end?’ Avarachan boomed. 
Avarachan’s voice brought me down to earth with a bang and I said ‘No,no. It was just Jo making his morning duty call.’
‘I have to go out a bit early today, Sara’ he said.
‘Works perfect for me. The furniture folks will show up soon too. Let us have our breakfast pretty soon then’ I said and went to the kitchen.
Hardly was I done with the breakfast dishes when the furniture guys came by. They moved the existing furniture to its new destination and neatly wrapped up their work in Jo’s room. By afternoon I had finished up the room. There was no denying that the new furniture lent a sophisticated look to the good old bedroom. If only the children would be able to appreciate it, I sighed.
In the afternoon Bindu called me up and said that Sally called her in the evenings and happily told the events of the day. Seems their cabin mate, Leela Aunty was a cousin of their acquaintance in Chennai. Bindu said that since Sally generally refrained from mentioning Johnny she had called him and chatted a while. After she hung up I wondered why I hadn’t tried to talk to Sally. As I couldn’t unearth any valid reason, I chose to put it down to my innate diffidence.
Later I received a call from Razia. She was leaving the next day to US. When I started to thank her for the floral touch she brought to our place she said ‘Sara, you are giving me too much credit. My dear, I took a flower arrangement class at the community college near my place in America. Now I can easily mix and match blooms and stems. I know when floral arrangements should take center stage and when they should remain as the classic background. Actually I have to thank you for giving me the opportunity to display the skill I learnt. You won’t believe the compliments I overheard.’
‘As for hosting the ‘Kachakoduppu’ outside’ chuckled Razia ‘Sara, we did ourselves the favor. This allowed for effortless cleaning up of the indoors. The outdoors relaxes everybody - nobody has to complain about the heat or where to sit. The kids get to run around, spills are not an issue, and nature is the perfect backdrop.’
We knew the train would be reaching Guwahati in the early morning and I was on tenterhooks while preparing breakfast and later eating it. As I was washing up, the phone rang and I almost ran up to take it. Only it turned out to be Avarachan’s friend. On his way to take the call, Avarachan consolingly patted me saying ‘Relax, old girl, Johnny will call when he is nice and ready.’
Finally when he did call it was nearly lunch time. He said that his cousin Sunny was waiting for them at the station and it was a thirty minutes’ drive to his place.  
‘Leela Aunty’s husband also had come to the station to collect his wife and children. Both husband and wife warmly invited us to their home before we left for Mizoram. Seeing the enthusiasm with which Sally accepted their invitation we will have to consider the feasibility’ Jo said.
‘En route Sunnychayan conveyed the news that his in-laws who were in their seventies had come to their home the day before. The old lady had slipped on the bathroom floor and fractured her leg. They had taken her to the hospital and now the leg was in a plaster for six weeks. The parents had come to Assam after their marriage and had taken up job as paramedical staff in a district hospital and eventually settled there.’ 
Jo said that the slight apologetic tone which he could detect in his cousin’s words got clarified when they reached their place. It was a two-bedroom house with a drawing-cum-dining hall and a roomy enclosed veranda at the front. Appachan-Ammachy occupied one bedroom and Sunnychayan and Elsymama had prepared their own bedroom for us. But Jo said that Sally who was most relieved at the turn of events got into action with her inimitable style of cajoling and made them agree to her plan of our roughing it with the kids. 
‘So Amme, I get to sleep with eight year old Tim on the sofa in the varenda and Sally with twelve year old Tina on a mattress in the hall. In the evening, we plan to go out with the children who have freely offered their services as guides. This call I am making at a short distance from the house. I will call you tomorrow after we return from the Kaziranga Park. Bye.’
After I put down the phone, I sat in the sofa for a while musing over what Jo conveyed. I could empathize with Sally’s relief, yet a half-suppressed sigh escaped me when I got up.
When I updated Avarachan with Jo-Sally’s news over dinner he gave his usual ‘Hmm’ in response. Anyway I spent the daytime getting our house shipshape for the children’s homecoming.
Jo’s next call came towards five in the evening the next day. Avarachan and I had just settled in our side veranda for our tea. His ‘Hi Amme’ had a cheery undertone which immediately lifted my spirits.
‘Yes Mone’ I responded eagerly.
‘Well as I told you, we have just got out of the Kaziranga Park and the kids, Thali included, are enjoying their second helping of icecream in the nearby parlor.’
‘How was the Park and all?’
‘Amme, it was truly amazing. It is indeed a World Heritage Site. Since we had only a day we couldn’t sign up for their hard-core Safari packages. So we had to be content for the guided one-day trekking program. The kids did me proud - talk about plucky little ones. They walked around the whole place with nary a whimper. There is a reason why this Park is featured in so many documentaries and ads. It is nature in all its majestic glory. I have captured digitally whatever I could. Amme, the rhinos, the deer, the elephants, the birds, the trees, and the shrubs everything is mesmerizing. You need at least a week to soak it all in. I feel really bad having to give Brahmaputra a miss. So close still so far away.’
I bit my lip in time before I blurted out enthusiastically ‘There is IIT Guwahati.’ Instead I asked ‘And Thali?’
‘Amme, I am convinced our Thali is a bundle of surprises. As soon as we got out of the house she was a totally changed person, as chirpy and cheerful as a teenaged sister of Tina. Maybe it is the company of the two kids or maybe it is the relaxed ambience of the outdoors, or maybe a combination of everything. Whatever it be, by the time our taxi showed up, she had reverted to our old Thali ordering me around in her no-nonsense tone ‘You sit in the front Jocha’ and promptly got into the rear with the kids.’
‘I can imagine that. Oho! That’s funny.’ I said laughingly. ‘How did you take it Jo?’
“Well, I regained my mental equilibrium pretty quickly and played along with her mood fairly well, I hope. Actually Amme, I don’t know whether it is a façade or a fantasy. Either way I am not going to deny myself the pleasure it gives me. ‘
‘That is right Mone. Just hold on, who knows the rainbow may be right round the corner.’
‘May your words come true. Amme, we will be leaving for Mizoram very early morning. So hopefully I shall call you after we get there. I hope both of you are keeping fine. Bye.’
I told Avarachan what Jo had conveyed. A slow smile spread over his face and he said ‘So they are back to square one isn’t it? Not too bad I’d say. Thara, do you remember our journey from Guwahati to Mizoram all those years ago?’
I resolutely kept my attention on the cup of tea which had gone cold to avoid seeing the merry twinkle in his eyes. 
‘Ah! Well Sara, I have asked the plumber to come tomorrow to fix the leaking pipe in the bathroom.’
‘Thank God, it has been leaking for three days’ I replied relieved at the change of topic.
But that didn’t prevent me from recalling our first journey to Aizwal, the capital city of Mizoram - set on the ridges of steep hills (flanked on the north by the craggy peaks of Burtlang Hills). It was a bright morning and it was with happy anticipation that I got into the waiting bus. At the middle, a seat for 3 persons was lying vacant and we took it. I occupied the window seat and as the bus started to move, I eagerly kept my eyes on the passing unfamiliar scenery. Avarachan had warned me that it was a long tedious journey. He was leisurely looking over the headlines of the newspaper he had bought. At times I called his attention to something which interested me. The pleasant companionship we shared in the train continued to hold.  Later I saw him stuff the newspaper into the side pocket of his bag which already had a slight bulge with the previous day’s newspaper. I looked at my watch and realized that one hour had gone by. The bus was bumping its way over the rough hilly terrain, full of twists and turns. A small child sitting on the front seat had begun to throw up and the smell nauseated me and to my dismay, I promptly followed suit. 
Within seconds, Avarachan held out a paper cone made out of newspaper and hastily made a few more. Once started, it seemed I could not stop. I felt Avarachan rubbing my back with firm strokes to ease the discomfort. I was totally spent after the severe bout of retching. I felt miserable and felt like crying. I had closed my eyes and I knew that tears were trickling down my cheeks. Suddenly I felt my face being moped by a damp cloth and heard Avarachan urging me to blow my nose and feel comfortable. I obeyed without protest. The next thing I knew was Avarachan’s strong right arm circling my shoulders and making my head rest on it. 
‘Try to sleep’ he whispered in my ear in the softest tone he could manage. How long I slept I had no idea but when I opened my eyes, the bus had stopped in front of a small shop and passengers were alighting out of it.
‘Let us get out and drink tea Sara’ Avarachan got up and waited. 
It was a small shop of sorts managed by two very smart women. One of them was preparing tea and the other serving it with cut pieces of pineapple. Seeing my perplexity at the odd combination Avarachan smilingly said ‘Drink the tea and eat the pineapple, it is supposed to be the best antidote to gagging you know. Don’t worry I have ample stock of newspaper and cloth in my pocket here. So go ahead and enjoy the tea my dear’ which made me laugh.
‘Ha! That is better’ he said handing me the cup of tea.
Actually I didn’t want either one for fear of starting another bout of throwing up. As Avarachan would have none of it I complied and surprisingly felt the better for it. As I sat beside Avarachan on the small railing sort of a seat my eyes wearily rested on the small stretch of low wall adjacent to the shop. There the two capable women had put up a vivid three-layer garden. The top layer held mint and other herbs. The bottom layer held bougainvillea’s of different shades. Such was its chi that I literally felt all lethargy leaving me. To me, that little garden was a cut above all the other gardens I had ever seen. 
There were two more such short stops before we reached Aizwal and by the time we stepped out we were far advanced on our way to being seasoned marrieds.
Even though in all these years of our life together neither of us had ever referred to that eventful journey, the incident used to flash across my memory occasionally filling my mind with wonder as to how such an unpleasant experience could bring about the eventual happy outcome. It was an ode to that journey that our side garden was modelled after that small humble wall up in Mizoram.
In the morning I was kept busy with my part-time help and the plumber who for once promptly turned up and did his job. Avarachan came for having lunch a little earlier than usual saying that he didn’t feel well and would take rest in the afternoon. 
On his way to the bedroom he called out ‘Did the kids call Thara?’ However he didn’t make any comment to my ‘Not yet.’
But as the afternoon wore on, I began to freak out. And my anxiety did a double take when Bindu called asking for Jo-Sally’s news. She must have guessed from the tone of my voice that I was worried stiff for she quickly tried to reassure me by saying that perhaps due to bad weather the flight might have been delayed.
‘Yes, that could be the reason. I’ll call you as soon as I hear from them’ I told her.
But the expected call didn’t come even after I made the 4 o’clock tea. Anyway Avarachan said that the afternoon nap had restored his well-being and he sat down sipping the hot tea leisurely.
I knew it was unreasonable but Avarachan’s casual ‘No news of kids yet Thara?’ irritated me and I didn’t care to reply. As I was taking my cup of tea the phone rang. I jumped up and with my heart thudding hard against my ribs, took up the receiver.
‘Amme, I am asking you a million dollar question. In all the years of your married life - did you ever realize Unki is a genius at organizing people?’
‘Unki, a genius at what? What are you trying to convey? I haven’t a clue Mone? Are you sure you don’t mean me?’
‘No Amme, no, for that you have to ask him direct. Thali is of the opinion that the word ‘wizard’ is more apt. As I am not much good in figuring out the nuances of English language I am not correcting her. My cousin on Mummy’s side has arrived. We are going to visit my grandmother’s sister and her family. We will call later. Bye for now.’  
I put down the receiver but stayed rooted there. 
Avarachan touched my shoulder and turned me towards him and asked ‘What is it Thara?’ There was no mistaking the anxiety writ large on his face. That gave me a vicarious satisfaction and I decided on a pat reply.
‘Well,’ I drawled, ‘our dear son says that I sure have for my husband, a genius at organizing people.’
To his credit, Avarachan blinked for a fraction of a second and then to my utter amazement, he threw back his head and guffawed till tears started rolling down. The next instant I found myself engulfed in a tight embrace and tilting my head upwards, fixed his merry eyes on mine and asked ‘Want to know why he said that?’
He continued without waiting for my reply ‘While saying goodbye to the couple at the railway station, I told him.’ He stopped and then modulating in his usual booming voice to a serious stage whisper said ‘Look here son, I know now there are regular air services between Guwahati and Aizwal. But take my word, never miss the chance to view the enchanting rolling hills sitting cozily in a bus. I can guarantee that it will be a once-in-a-lifetime experience. Give me your promise son to kiss those tickets goodbye.’ 
‘Sure Unki, I promise’ our son said breezily.
Avarachan paused.
I hadn’t realized that my gaze at him had turned into a gape until he told me urgently ‘Hey Thara! Blink your eyes or they will pop out’ and gently patted my cheek. That did it. I slid down to the nearby sofa in a convulsive fit of laughter while Avarachan looked on as pleased as Punch until the strident ringing of the telephone broke the spell.
‘Hi! Tharaunty we have reached home. Can you guess what we are watching?’
‘You tell me, dear.’
‘The most beautifullest rainbow at the Kyllang Rock. Jocha wanted me to tell you that.’
‘Thank you, my pet.’  
